Elena Farmin  
Comment: *FHTH*, 35-45   
*Faces of History*, “History in the Medieval Mirror,” 99-124

  As was the case with the readings on Monday, the *Faces of History* selection benefits from having plenty of details, while the chapter from Popkin’s book benefits from being shorter and easier to read through. While each author took a different approach to how they discussed history and historiography in the Middle Ages, it is quite interesting that certain subjects and themes appeared in both readings. Both discussed how history did not become a serious academic discipline until the Late Middle Ages, how the adoption of Christianity in the former Roman Empire and among “barbarian” peoples changed the priorities and style of historical writing, and the national histories of kingdoms formed after the fall of the Roman Empire. 

  Despite being the shorter reading, the chapter from *FHTH* manages to cover more ground than *Faces of History*. The latter focuses entirely on historiography in the Western Christian tradition, while the former includes the contributions of Jewish, Chinese, and Muslim historians. To be clear, I am not saying that the author of *Faces of History* should be reprimanded for not including non-Christian scholars from other parts of the world in the chapter. Still, it is refreshing to learn more about historiography beyond the Western world. We have discussed in previous class meetings about how twenty-first century historians are making greater strides in including the narratives of peoples often ignored in Western academia. I do not know when *Faces of History* was published, but I do know that *FHTH* was published in 2016. Ergo, Popkin is more caught up with the times and the shifting focus of historiography.
  
  Both selections do a great job at distinguishing between chronicles and annals, and historical narratives. Reading about the distinctions between those forms of historical writing does bring up some interesting questions about how history should be told. Should history be written as a sequence of events with biographies of important figures placed in certain sections, or should it be written as a detailed account akin to a well-written fictional story? History teachers and my mother (who is also a history teacher) have told me my entire school career that the discipline is more than just listing dates and facts. Not only is a narrative more engaging, but it also provides more information about what living during a certain time period was like and the legacy of past events whereas a timeline can only reveal so much.  

  
