As religion develops alongside human civilization so does truth. **The practices of history are forced to adapt to societies perceptions of truth**. Both the Popkins and *medieval-mirror* pieces go through great lengths to stress this idea. The pieces both take an accurately prescriptive look at how religiously focused scholars from the medieval period can warp the narrative and function of history they write simply by holding personal bias. This enforces the importance of historical  narrative in an authors approach to the subject they cover. History as an academic concept isn’t only aimed at chronicling past events but at the *necessity to analyze and use information of the past in the present*. The academic foundations of history are laid upon the assertion that humans must be able to critically analyze information about the world in a way that allows us to apply our knowledge in future development.

Both pieces delve into the importance of narrative as a fundamental function/tool of history that is bent to the will of the author. Perhaps this is not the intended purpose to begin historical scholarship but as a history is written it will warp to the author’s basic understandings of truth. A Medieval author’s biases revolved around the acceptance of Christianity as their personal truth. Medival scholars truths were moral, and by chronicling their world they believed in the truth of the saints, their deeds, devotions, and convictions (Popkins.P.39). As modern readers we are lucky to have hindsight pleasantly available in our toolkit to claim a more fundamental grasp on empirical truths that structure the past. To the medieval author, his was also objective truth and by emphasizing the morality of their histories they also conceived their truths (Mirror.P.120).  

 While we may see medieval work as flawed histories subject to religious bias, they still hold a fundamental philosophical ideal of narrative alive today. Historians still pride themselves in the ability to direct narrative through grounded analytical research. *A historian’s narrative is their analysis of events; through their analysis they hope to foster a more holistic understanding of the human story*. *This current form of scholorship is unique to our modern world, and in the larger tradition of history reinforces a concept of relativity*. A society’s use of history will change, and must have plasticity in its usage like language or laws. If history did not serve the society that relied on it then history would be left behind and abandoned like a home with no family.
