### Medieval Historiography - Summary

- Similarities can be found between Eurocentric, Western historiography and early Chinese historians. **Political development in both worlds often inspired, dictated, and dominated the historical record.** While Roman history focused on the success of an expanding empire, Chinese historian Sima Qian detailed the unification of China under the Han Dynasty (Popkin p. 35). Chinese loyalty to the field of historiography even came, in some cases, at loss of life or limb (bless your... _heart_... Sima Qian). His works were particularly based in statistics, though Sima Qian did allow himself to directly comment on the lessons to be derived from his work, rather than allow the reader to observe the information and come to their own conclusions (Popkin p. 36).

- _Religion has served as a foundational historiographical base in that its purpose is clearly defined_ (the explanation of who's, what's, and why's) _and its audience is narrowly tailored_ (appealing to those of common faith) (Kelley pp. 100-101; Popkin pp. 36-37).

- _Some histories (whether rooted in myth or fact) are selectively revived in order to serve a particular narrative._ An example of such is the grim, but noble, story of the mass suicide which took place on Masada plateau fortress (Popkin p. 37). This narrative served as propaganda during the early years of the modern Israeli state. **When the nation faced existential threat** (on several occasions), **it looked for inspiration in the historical record.**

- **Education and literacy directly impact the study of history and the field of historiography.** "Among the consequences of the disintegration of the western Roman Empire was a decline in the number of those who received the kind of education that would allow them to become historians" (Popkin p. 39). The fragmentation of empires, loss of records, inaccessibility to histories (often due to language barriers and literacy) all contributed to inconsistencies and an overall 'dark age' in the field of historiography during European Medieval times (Popkin p. 40). 

- At the same time European history was limited, problematic, and scarce, Chinese historiography was developing and served a very pointed purpose. From the 7th century CE through the 13th century CE, _Chinese historiography was particularly political._ In fact, the historical record was most purposefully used to legitimize incoming rulers and dynastic shifts (Popkin p. 42).

- Though it is often said, "history is written by the victors", **even the most powerful societies are influenced by sub-set cultures and surrounding peoples.** Islam, a quickly dominant cultural force in the Near East, was influenced by the Greek, Christians, and Jews (Popkin p. 42) and "the national historiographical traditions of Europe emerged from the histories of the barbarian nations..." (Kelley p. 118).

- Islamic historian Ibn Khaldun asserted that **understanding of human society and the laws which govern it was essential to the writing of history** (Popkin p. 42). He analyzed the reasons that motivated historians to write and, more specifically, why their accounts might differ from one another.
