## *History in the Medieval Mirror*
   We have established that history aims to tell the truth. However, do chronicles do a better job of telling the truth? Two orders of writing are discussed: chronological order and logical order (p.102).Chronicles give us a list of factual events in chronological order, whereas history adds a narrative to facts and tells them in logical order. It is stated that chroniclers are in fact more truthful than historians due to their chronological writing style (p.120). It is pertinent to understand the meaning of **truth** in this context. Both chroniclers and historians aim to tell the truth, however, their rhetorical skills differ and paint different narratives. Telling a story in chronological order does not allow room for interpretation or criticism, only for straight facts. Telling a story in logical order allows for the historian to both interpret and criticize the situation at hand. 
   
   Can these two forms of writing be **blurred**? Certainly the historian begins by collecting facts, most likely in chronological order (chronicles), before adding a narrative.By adding the narrative, the historian is linking all of the facts listed in the chronicle and connecting them to each other. Chronicles do not link facts together, and this is a major criticism of this form of writing (Popkin, 45). As historians, it is important for us to connect facts together to create a story that flows from beginning to end.This is what makes history both appealing and understandable to historians and non historians alike. This form of writing also allows the historian to convey their major points; often times writing historical facts **out of order** helps highlight what the historian finds most important or fascinating. 

  Although both readings discuss religiosity and its' emergence in historical writing, the different forms of writing remain at the core of the discussion.Examples of both chroniclers and historians are given; however, a conclusion on what form of writing is better is not given.This is because **the answer is not simple!** As mentioned above, these two forms of rhetoric become **blurred** when the historian sits down to write on the history he has chosen to study.  
