# Questions- Medieval Historiography
1. Popkin points out that Chinese historian Sima Qian was more concerned than his fellow Greek and Roman historians at pointing out the moral lessons that can be gleaned from historical events. As modern "scientific" historians we often assume that the correct way to record history is with the facts and no added commentary or bias from the author, however you also often hear the maxim that we study history in order to not repeat our mistakes. So as participants in history ourselves is it really "unprofessional" to make moral judgements in your recording of history as long as it is clear they are being framed as an opinion and could it possibly enhance our recording of history if more moral judgements were made? (FHTH 36)
2. Geoffery of Monmouth's _History of the Kings of Britain_ is one of the most well read Medieval histories due to its divergence from the "dry" style of historical recording of the era. Part of the history includes mythic tales such as the stories of King Arthur which is now a world famous legend. The entertainment value of Geoffery's work has made it so that his histories have been so widely disseminated some people do not know which are true and which are myth. Just how important is it to write entertainingly and creatively as a historian? Is part of what denotes the importance of a history how much it is read and known by the general public and not just academia? (FHTH 43-44)
3. In _History in the Medieval Mirror_ we are introduced to many Medieval European historians such as Gregory who chronicled several centuries worth of early christian history, particularly concerning the christianization of "barbarian" cultures. Gergory's work is often criticized for its disorganization which has been argued is due to his concern of symbolic chronolgy relating to Christianity rather than his concern for time based chronology. The accuracy of Gregory's work can be criticized due to the fact that he is heavily biased towards the Christian narrative. It can be argued that as americans our basic history that is taught in public school is slanted so heavily towards the American state that the same issues of context and erasure that marred Gregory's work are present in our own narratives. As modern "scientific" historians concerned with factuality and revision for completeness how do we reconcile these academic desires with the fact that society at large is educated in an entirely different and what one could call outdated paradigm? (Mirrors 107-109)

