### Scientific History in an Era of Conflict
#### FHTH pg. 97 - 124  
Historians of the early 20th century began to question the validity of history, and drifted away from Ranke’s more scientific method of history. With the World Wars, many histories were influenced by the undercurrent of nationalism that was felt throughout the world, producing histories that pushed their own nations agenda, instead of the actual events, a trend that would lead to the decline of Rankean methodology. Throughout the world, nationalism was a large influence on historians, especially after both World Wars. Historians began to notice this trend after World War I, when many doubts were raised surrounding the cause of World War I (Popkin, pg. 107). The blame was placed upon Germany, but as documents surfaced that told a different story, historians began to doubt their completely “scientific history”. 

In Soviet Russia, historians were also forced to follow a national history (Popkin, pg. 109). After the communist revolution, Trotsky wrote his own version of the Russian Revolution. While it was based in the actual events that happened, it still pushed a nationalist view of the Russian Revolution, and made it out to be the people taking back their nation, when in reality the Soviets would continue to oppress their people. In new regimes, like Soviet Russia and the multiple countries that were created after World War I, nationalism and national histories were one of the keys to creating a strong nation. They had a purpose. But, because of this, the seed of doubt of many national histories was planted in the historian’s mind. Much of this nationalism arose from a need to strengthen the nation-state after war, but it was a contributing factor to the later questioning of Rankean methodology. 

While many communist nations would force their historians to follow a distinct history that pushed nationalism, democratic nations, like the United States, were not free from folly. Most early twentieth century histories surrounding African Americans painted them as lesser beings, and looked at slavery through rose colored glasses. When African American historians began telling the story, completely different than what the white historians had claimed, it raised a lot of confusion surrounding American history (Popkin, pg. 108). If one group could tell American history differing completely from another group, was there even a true American history? This new view on the shortcomings of histories based in projecting nationalism was one of the reasons that historians began to question the validity of objective truth, and began analyzing the problems with the Rankean methodology. 

7: I'm having a hard time distinguishing what you're summarizing from the chapter as a whole and what your original contribution / analysis / comment is. Your topic of nationalism and objectivity is super important, but what precisely is it that you want to say about that that wasn't in the reading? This is probably an issue of framing and emphasis rather than omission or neglect.
