1. Professional historians debated that the practice of history was becoming increasingly disconnected with the masses and disenfranchized sections of the population (H to H-Net p.98). There was also a sense that media such as film was farther reaching and captivating as tool to engage and stimulate audiences, while also being mindful of the validity and accuracy of film adaptations of historical events. Should more of an effort be made to create new and exciting outlets for legitimate history? Would this reinvigor interest in the field?
2. Of Nietzshe's 3 primary forms of history, Monumental, Antiquarian, and Critical, which do you believe modern historians focus on the most? Why do you feel this way? (H to H-Net p.99)
3. R.G. Collingwood argued that, "the historian must re-enact the past in his own mind... only in so far as he does this does he any historical knowledge." Does this notion that historical knowledge can only be examined through the subjective lense of the present have merit to you? In what ways do you agree or disagree with this assertion?
4. Francois Simiand argued that historians accounts had become obscured by 3 major "idols." these include an exaggerated focus on politics, an ingrained habit of focussing and emphasizing the history of individuals, and an obsession over chronology instead of significance (H to H-Net p.103). Can you think of any examples that fit into these models of Simiand's "idols"?
5. The Annales school of thought argued that history needed to broaden the sources it views as valuable in order to draw a more complete picture of past events and eras. Do you think this is an approach that has gained more traction in today's study of historical sources?

6: All your questions follow the same model, which is to pick out a quote or idea and then ask if it applies to modern historical work. It's good to have a few questions like that, but be you're using the questions to show that you are carefully analyzing the reading on its own terms, and balancing it against previous readings.
