### Early 20th Century
Jerome T. Mondragon

Wilhelm Dilthey argues that the autobiography is more reliabe than reconstuction of history through documents. Dilthey states that "We are first of all creatures of history, before we become observers of history." (Popkin 100) This is by far a bold and exageratted claim. Autobiographies have got to be one the most biased and one-sided sources a historian can use. 

The most obvious example of such biases in autobiographies are those written from Julius Caesar. Caesar wrote about his conquest of Gaul in the _Gallic Wars_. He portrayed himself as a glorious leader who's only serving the interests of Rome. (Popkin, p. 33) It was also written in the third-person and a self-promoting manner. ("Roman Foundations, p. 53) However, Caesar had politcal ambitions and his writings was a means to boost his prestige and gain a political advantage. Similarly, Niccoli Machiavelli wrote about the Italian power struggle during the late 1500s. While not a memior, he provides a glimpse of Italian rule during the Renaissance. He's also an obsever of history as Dilthey asserts. In _The Prince_, he provides political advice for the upcoming rulers. Machiavelli claims that he doesn't want to be honored and is undeserving of fortune. His only intent is to show the perspective of the people. (Prince p. 4) However, it's unlikely that he would solicite his advice or provide his services without gaining political favor. Since _The Prince_ must of have had a politcal motive and bias, should it be an honest source?

In the 20th Century, both Winston Churchill and Charles de Gaulle wrote about their personal accounts during the Second World War. (Popkin 113) These memoirs may no doubt be inspiring, they only provide a single perspective and only one side of the story. Since the Allies won World War 2, and history is written by the victors, how can these sources be truly reliable and be accurately assessed by historians? 

If autobiographies and first person testimony offers invaluable accounts to history, it shouldn't be the sole source of information. Historians must consider the author's motive before using their sources. E.H. Carr said it best by saying, "study the historians before you study the facts." (Popkin p. 122)

7: For all the gazillion things covered in the chapter, this seems a rather specific point to focus on in your comment. And you seem to resolve the potential danger of autobiographies (bias, etc) in the last paragraph. No historian uses only autobiographyies for information, and most are now trained how to use them carefully. EXCELLENT use of past readings in the second paragraph (otherwise you would have gotten a 6), but it seems to be only suggesting that autobiographies can be self-serving, which I think we all already would agree is true. 
