### Scientific History in an Era of Conflict Questions

1. In the beginning of his chapter, Popkin states that **Leopold von Ranke** "_had become the symbol of a new approach to history_" (p. 97). He credits Ranke for solidifying history's place in academia. By giving Ranke such an important role in historiography, does Popkin bias himself towards Rankean theory throughout the chapter? If so, how does that skew the representation of those who "rebelled" against Ranke's model of history (p. 98)?

2. **Friedrich Nietzsche** warned that **"excessive obsession with knowledge about the past _for its own sake_ could be dangerous"** in his essay "The Use and Abuse of History" (p 99). Was Nietzsche's warning warranted? Should historians consider his analyses and criticisms of his three forms of history, monumental, antiquarian, and critical history, when writing?

3.  **Wilhelm Dilthey** and **Benedetto Croce** both rejected Ranke's models in favor of **"idealist historic thought"** which emphasized personal experience and mental reenactment of the past (p. 100-101). Does one have to reimagine the past in order to understand historical knowledge? Does this account for the rise of visual media used in the twentieth century? Does visualization help clarify history or open it to manipulation, as filmmakers did with _Birth of a Nation_ (p. 105)?

4. Throughout the chapter, Popkin discusses the **challenge of creating a shared consensus over national histories**. This included newly independent countries, such as India, as well established countries such as the United States (p 115, 120-121). Indian historians struggled in whether the country's Hindu identity had room for other religious groups, and the United States still struggles with its history on racism and slavery (p. 115,120). In creating national histories, how do historians decide whom to include or exclude? How do societies manage the repercussions of excluding entire communities of people from their national histories?

6. Popkin briefly describes the difficulty in reconstructing national histories of African countries that did not have written documents for its precolonial periods. Historians turned to **oral history** arguing that "such testimonies could provide significant information about the continent's precolonial past" (p. 121). Can oral history be considered a reliable source, or is it too similar to myth history discussed previously to provide useful information? Does oral history need to be autobiographical or can it be passed down through generations?

9: Very good set of questions. Remember to use prior readings to provide a start to an answer (you do this best in #6). Question #1 is excellent because it asks us to critically think about historiography based on comparing the last two readings, and grows directly out of your thinking about the chapter.
