Historiography: the critical assessment of the ways in which historians try to reconstruct past events as distinguished from the statements they make about the past.
History vs literature: history talks about the past and analyzes it, while literature is set in the past, from that POV.
Most students don't want to study historiography, and are forced to take it because they are getting a degree in history. It is not as exciting and eye capturing as just studying a certain time period.
Historiography is also not as easily defined by facts. Generally, it deals with larger concepts that sweep across societies.
Historiography can also be used to justify the study of history as a whole. History can be used to create a national identity, to remind a country of its past wrongdoings, and to study human begavior across societies. Sometimes societies do not see this value, and historiography can be used to prove them.
The study of history has multiple different types: political, economic, diplomatic, military, cultural, and social.
The different types of history use different sources. While political history can use political treaties and laws that were created, social history uses newpapers of the time, as well as records of arrests at the time.
The different types of history can also tell a more truthful story, instead of the image that the government of the time wants to project. Social history helps with this, as it uses accounts of the people of the time more than the published political documents. Instead of the dominant societies POV, social and cultural history can bring in the minorities POV.
