The Historian
  
Since most consumers of history do not have time or desire to read enough primary source documents to sufficiently understand trends and movements in history, we must rely upon qualified historians to give society a proper understanding of the past. In Chapter 1 of Herodotus to H-Net, Jeremy Popkin gives the reader an interesting perspective on why scholars enter the field of history and the dilemmas that accompany the study of history. However, this article leaves the reader with many unanswered questions. Historians are often placed in the difficult predicament of telling a narrative on a past subject without complete and full documentation. Popkin skillfully explains the historical debate surrounding Hitler’s culpability in the Holocaust (P.7). But, without an undeniable primary source document from Hitler ordering the extermination of all Jews in Germany, historians must debate the extent of his involvement in the genocide. If no proper documentation is ever released, will this debate be settled or will historians continue to argue its merits without consensus?
  
On page 9, the author states that by studying historiography “we can learn why popular history differs from scholarly research” and why the field maintains the social network of historians through the practice of scholarly reviews. This discussion also raises the question of why popular history threatens the practice of scholarly history? Popular history might often portray a historical event to benefit an individual, society or ideal favored by the reader while a scholarly source seeks the truth with objectivity. Since successful historians can deconstruct misconceptions and change societal attitudes about key subjects, we must ascertain the merits of the author’s credibility. 
     
This chapter leaves many crucial questions about the authors behind historical research. The narratives and themes of a story are dependent of what the historian sees fit to examine and explain. The content of the research raises questions on why the author chose that topic? Is the author writing this book to make profits without necessary regard for the truth? And from what political perspective is this author writing from? On page 11 of this chapter, there is a discussion of the new paradigms in historiography as to the study of minorities, women and social groups (“others”) that have been left out of general historical studies. Unfortunately, it is difficult for historians to acquire primary sources while studying “others” because these groups often lack the economic, political and social power to maintain writings and accounts of their lives. Popkin does not adequately what political, societal and economic repercussions the historiography trend could have. Furthermore, when analyzing the importance of an historian’s work, it is crucial to understand why the author chose that topic and the purpose and agenda of the author’s work. 
