	The reading for Monday does a decent job of preparing the way for our own study of History this semester. It gives us a nice overview of what we’re going to do and what historiography is, but to be more specific, it demonstrates exactly what it says it will do almost immediately. Popkin defines Historiography and brings up some questions and problems studying it, like finding reliable sources on the internet and how to identify and work with bias, all while displaying his own bias.
	The top of page eleven reads a little rough, for example, like the author is trying too hard to not be biased. He says that the United States has a historiographical controversy about opening up disciplinary perspectives to “others,” and then lists them out as “African Americans, Latinos, Native Americans, homosexuals, and a variety of other ‘Others’” (pages 10-11). It’s nice seeing these minority groups recognized, but the way they are presented is put in a way that can easily be construed as a series of micro-aggressions. “Latinos” is more inclusive than some phrases, but ignores the gender politics of the phrasing completely. “Latinos” is the masculine form of the word, and specifies Latin men in particular. The gender neutral (and gender inclusive) phrase instead would be “Latinxs.” The same thing goes for the phrase “homosexuals—” while it’s not exactly inaccurate, it excludes the parts of LGBTQ+ history made by transgender, bisexual, and the rest of the group’s members. By just saying it’s “homosexual” history, you ignore the foundations of LGBTQ+ history in the United States, like the Stonewall riots, which was started by transwomen of color. 
	It’s engaging to read the text for exactly the reasons the author says historiography is important. There’s a passage included that specifically mentions the exact problem he displays above: historiography might “ruin history” for the student because it makes it easier to spot biases in texts and accounts of history. We can apply that right away to the above section: we can start judging how reliable this author’s account of history and the study of history by how he categorizes it. We can tell that he is not likely part of the LGBTQ+ community because he refers to the cultural history as “homosexual” history, for example. This doesn’t guarantee that his accounts will be wrong, but it does demonstrate where we could place his version of LGBTQ+ history, if he discusses it later in the text, as far as reliability, whether he has an insider or outsider account, and bias.
