This first chapter gave us a good introduction on what a student can expect when studying Historiography whether it be for a school requirement or just personal interest. The author really wanted to ensure that students could benefit from Historiography no matter what career or academic interest they wish to pursue. 

Historiography is not just about studying the history of history, it’s about questioning why we discuss the events of the past in certain ways whether through books, journal articles, movies, or games. Learning how new developments in technology has impacted the way history is presented to the public. Questioning whether we are getting the whole story about the past or has it been cherry picked to benefit certain groups over others? Questioning the past affects how we interact with present day events. We come to realize that Historiography doesn’t just concern history in general, it involves cultural identities, artistic expression, sociology and psychology, military and political insight.

We have to recognize the impact different backgrounds have on our perspectives when studying history. Someone from Japan isn’t going to see the events of World War II in the same way an American might. African-Americans may not see Franklin D. Roosevelt’s housing plans via the New Deal in a positive light compared to White Americans who were given better deals in better neighborhoods. These policies were not equal in any way and they greatly affected people’s lives and futures. When we study Historiography, we realize that history is much more than memorizing facts and dates. 

The author doesn’t want us to lose interest in particular topics within History, but he wants us to be critical when analyzing historical records. The author wants us to see History from multiple perspectives and question how historians came to the conclusions they did about the lives and events of the past. Are historians being true to the “facts” or are they telling a narrow story? Does that matter? 

 
