#### Anthropology and Historiography

##### Desiree' Martinez

My aim in this essay is to demonstrate how **Anthropology** has aided as well as influenced change in historiographical work over the centuries. **This section will illustrate change in historiographical works over time and demonstrate how historiographic authority reformed along the development and emergence of anthropology**. First, we need to understand Anthropology as its own discipline and second, how anthropology has influenced the methodological practice and perspective of the historian.

Anthropology in its broadest definition is the study of the development of human societies and cultures. The aim of the anthropologist is to study human development through the analysis of biological evolution, communicative practices, social intergration, and acquisition of material culture. Prior to World War I, anthropology was not seen as its own discipline but interchangeable with **Sociology**. As it was the aim of the sociologist to study social relations and their influence on societal development and progression. Thus, it was the objective of the historian to distinguish truth in the origin, development, and functionality of human society through a secularized historical process.

The roots of anthropology and sociology could be seen in antiquity starting with Greek historians **Herodotus** and **Thucydides**. Their intention was to preserve the truth of the human past through the method of inquiry and analysis of evidence. As historian Jeremy D. Popkin states “What made the works of Herodotus and Thucydides different from previous records and stories about the past was their attempt to define history as a distinct method of telling the story of the past, unique above all because of its devotion to discovering and transmitting the truth about bygone events.” (Popkin, 2016, 27) For this reason, we can consider Herodotus’s _Histories_ and Thucydides’s _History of the Peloponnesian War_, as the start of historiography in the Western world.

The collapse of Rome and the establishment of Christianity in the 5th century however, would shift the historiography of human history into that of divine origin as it was now “the purpose of the historian to show the working out of God’s plan for humanity.” (Popkin,2016, 37) The **Catholic Church** positioned itself as the authority over historical scholarship and therefore, “medieval historians often began their works with a summary of world history, drawn from the Bible and Roman sources.” (Popkin, 2016, 40) However, at the same time in Asia, historians would utilitze scienctific theories to understand society. In China “rulers of the **Tang dynasty** created an official _History Bureau_, charged with recording the events of the region” and Chinese historian “**Sima Guang** argued for the importance of evidence from archaeology as a way of verifying claims made in written sources.” (Popkin, 2016, 42) In the Arab world **Ibn Khaldun’s** _Muqaddima_ would “develop one of the first non-religious social theories, and anticipated Emile Durkheim’s ideas about social solidarity, which are today considered a cornerstone of scoiology and anthropology.” (Ericksen and Nielsen, 2001, 5)

It would be the **Enlightenment** of the 17th and 18th centuries where historians would adopt secularize views of **Social History** in union with scientific critique. As Europeans were being exposed to new cultures, historians would once again apply anthropological and sociological methods to understand human history. Eriksen and Nielson proclaim “only when society had emerged as an object to be continuously ‘improved’ and reshaped into more ‘advanced’ forms could the independent, rational individual change into someone new and different, and even 'truer to its nature.” (Eriksen and Nielson, 2001, 11) Thus, **Giambattista Vico’s** _La Scienza Nuova_, **Immanual Kant’s** _Critique of Pure Reason_ and **John Locke’s** _Essay Concerning Human Understanding_, would be some of the most influential histories to mediate concepts of individualism, class, property, and progression of human civilization.

The social changes of the 19th century would see anthropology and sociology diverge as one disciple and begin to emerge as two distinct sciences. (Green and Troup, 1999, 172) The French philosopher **Auguste Comte** would be the first to coin the term ‘_sociologie_’ (Green and Troup, 1999, 110) but it would be figures like **Karl Marx** and **Max Weber** who would expand on Comte’s social theories as the growth of capitalism and political modernity engrossed Europe. Furthermore, **Emile Durkheim’s** _Les Règles de la Méthode Sociologique_ would legitamize sociology has a science and lay the foundation for **Functionalism** which suggested, “that all aspects of society were interrelated and therefore society should be studied as a whole.”(Green and Troup, 1999, 174) Therefore, “while historians charted the rise of nations, anthropologist traced the cultural and social evolutions of mankind.” (Green and Troup, 1999, 172) Thus, **Charles Darwin’s** _The Orgin of Species_ and **Herbert Spencer’s** _Principles of Biology_ would use biological analogies to explain evolutionary theories regarding human history while **Lewis Henry Morgan’s** _Ancient Society_ and **Edward Burnett Tylor’s** _Primitive Culture_ would develop the concept of culture. As defined by Tylor, “taken in its wide ethnographic sense is that complex whole which includes knowledge, belief, art, morals, law, custom and any other capabilities and habits acquired by man as a member of society.” (Green and Troup, 1999, 172) The World Wars would however, influence new historiographical frameworks as they were being exposed to different parts of the world. 

In 1929 **Marc Bloch** and **Lucien Febvre** would establish the foundation for the _Annales School_ which instituted '_La Longue Durée_', long term histories and total-histories, that would inspire new frameworks for historic time which implemented anthropology, geography, history, and sociological theories. The practice of anthropology as a science in union with humanities transended historic anthropology from a social phenomenon to cultural. Previously, “the historian has so often to rely upon his imagination to trace links or deduce consequences which the anthropologist can see before his eyes.” (Thomas, 1963, 13) Anthropology therefore, “redirected historians attention away from the public, political sphere of human action towards private, daily life, by rediscovering old sources, including oral history and tradition.” (Houses, p. 174) These new methodological practices focused on quantitative analysis by way of fieldwork, participant observation, and examination of material culture.

It would be under the controversial German anthropologist **Franz Boas**, “Father of American Cultural Anthropology,” who would expand the development of culture based on his observations of indigenous Native American cultures. In his publications _The Mind of Primitive Man_, Boas would apply ethnographic anaylsis to his framework stating, “each people, each nation, each tribe had its fate, its irreplaceable character, and it was the task of the anthropologist, to document and defend it” (Eriksen and Nielsen, 2001, 49) and “though the anthropological point of view may thus pervade the treatment of an older branch of science and help to develop new standpoints, the assistance that anthropology renders, it does not destroy the independence of the older science which in a long history has developed its own aims and methods.” (Boas, 1904, 523) It would not be until the end of World War II that an equilibrium between the social and cultural would formulated into what is known as **Functionalism**.

Some of the most influential works in historiography would come in the 20th century as **Bronisław Kasper Malinowski’s** _Argonauts of the Western Pacific_ would influence athropological methods of **participant observation** and **fieldwork** as key approaches to understanding history as he concluded it would give an “all around vision” of man and culture. Furthermore, **Alfred Radcliffe-Brown** and **E.E. Evans-Pritchard’s** methods in **Social Anthropology** would give new insight to behavoir as “social institutions and relationships were perceived as mechanisms which ensured the survival and stablility of the social system as a whole.” (Green and Troup, 1999, 173) Moreover, **Intrepretive Archaeology** and **Narrative** would be developed and implemented into **Clifford Geertz’s** _The Interpretation of Cultures_. Geertz’s approach to history would use ‘thick descriptions’ to “get beneath surface behaviour to reach an emic (insiders’) understanding.” (Green and Troup, 1999, 177) Geetz deduced “the conjoining of History and Anthropology is not a matter of fusing two academic fields into a new Something-or-Other, but of redefining them in terms of one another by managing their relations within the bounds of a particular study: textual tactics. That sorting things into what moves and what moves it, what victimizes and what is victimized, or what happened and what we can say about what happened.” (Geertz, History and Anthropology, 329) Thus, by the middle of the 20th century the culmination of both disciplines history and anthropology consolidated.

**Ethnohistory** emerged as, “the study of the history of the peoples normally studied by anthropologist.” (Green and Troup, 1999, 175) **W. C. Sturtevant** explained “ethnohistorians add another cirterion for estimating reliability and bias to the battery of test historians have developed for the criticism of sources.” (Sturtevant, 2002, 13) Furthermore, historian **James Axtell** states, “ethnohistory encompasses archaeology, ethnology, history and lingustics, and the source materials available to the enthnohistorian which include folklore, oral tradition, maps, paintings, and artefacts, as well as written sources.” (Green and Troup, 1999, 175) Thus, as **Postmodernism** emerged in the late 20th century historians have been able to access new technologies, resources, and have accepted multiple perspectives on history. This has included histories previously ignored like **Gender** which had been previously told by men and **Indeginous** which had been told from a Eurocentric perspective. Nevertheless, we do not know how anthropology will influence historians of the future but **Natalie Zemon Davis** states that historians can still learn from anthropology “close observation of living process of social interaction; interesting ways of interpreting symbolic behaviour; suggestions about how the parts of a social system fit together; and material from cultures very different from those which historians are used to studying.” (Green and Troup, 1999, 177)

In conclusion, anthropology will continue to contribute to historiography as new topics are explored. Though we will never completely know everything that has occured in history, anthropology has given historians the tools to better understand the past.

##### References

Axtell, James. 1979. “Ethnohistory: An Historian’s Viewpoint.” Ethnohistory 26 (1): 1. http://libproxy.unm.edu/login?url=https://search.ebscohost.com/login.aspx?direct=true&db=hlh&AN=7680830&site=eds-live&scope=site.

Bruce G. Trigger, author. 1982. “Ethnohistory: Problems and Prospects.” Ethnohistory, no. 1: 1. https://doi.org/10.2307/481006.

Dube, Saurabh. 2007. Historical Anthropology. Oxford : Oxford University Press, 2007.

“Emile Durkheim: Selected Writings.” n.d. Accessed April 9, 2018. http://web.b.ebscohost.com.libproxy.unm.edu/ehost/ebookviewer/ebook/bmxlYmtfXzcxMTY3NV9fQU41?sid=e53a86d2-de1a-4d70-8080-0307b2132b75@sessionmgr120&vid=7&format=EB&rid=1.

Eriksen, Thomas Hylland, and Finn Sivert Nielsen. 2013. History of Anthropology. Anthropology, Culture and Society. London : Pluto Press, 2013. http://libproxy.unm.edu/login?url=https://search.ebscohost.com/login.aspx?direct=true&db=cat06111a&AN=unm.EBC3386723&site=eds-live&scope=site.

Franz Boas, author. 1904. “The History of Anthropology.” Science, no. 512: 513.

“From Herodotus to H-Net: The Story of Historiography.” n.d. Accessed May 7, 2018. https://platform.virdocs.com/app/v5/doc/223267/pg/38/search.

Geertz, Clifford. 1990. “History and Anthropology.” New Literary History, no. 2: 321.

Green, Anna, and Kathleen Troup. 1999. The Houses of History : A Critical Reader in Twentieth-Century History and Theory. New York : New York University Press, 1999.

Harris, Marvin. 1991. Cultural Anthropology. New York, NY : HarperCollins, ©1991.

Jacobs, Brian, and Patrick Kain. 2003. Essays on Kant’s Anthropology. New York, UNITED STATES: Cambridge University Press. http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/unm/detail.action?docID=217815.

Libera, Zbigniew. 2011. “History and Culture: Problems of Cultural Anthropology and Historical Anthropology.” Anthropos 106 (2): 597–602. http://www.jstor.org/stable/23031633.

Michael E. Harkin. 2010. “Ethnohistory’s Ethnohistory: Creating a Discipline from the Ground Up.” Social Science History, no. 2: 113. https://doi.org/10.1215/01455532-2009-022.

“Political Anthropology : Power And Paradigms.” n.d. Accessed April 24, 2018. http://web.b.ebscohost.com/ehost/ebookviewer/ebook/bmxlYmtfXzIwMDY5NV9fQU41?nobk=y&sid=0ad9527b-6b01-44dc-9e75-fea8ef3bfbd1@sessionmgr103&vid=4&format=EK&lpid=p01&rid=0.

Radcliffe-Brown, A. R., and Adam Kuper. 1977. The Social Anthropology of Radcliffe-Brown. London ; Boston : Routledge & Kegan Paul, 1977. http://libproxy.unm.edu/login?url=https://search.ebscohost.com/login.aspx?direct=true&db=cat05987a&AN=unm.3364444&site=eds-live&scope=site.

Scutt, Cecily, and Julia Hobson. 2013. “The Stories We Need: Anthropology, Philosophy, Narrative and Higher Education Research.” Higher Education Research & Development 32 (1): 17–29. https://doi.org/10.1080/07294360.2012.751088.

Smith, M. G. 1962. “History and Social Anthropology.” The Journal of the Royal Anthropological Institute of Great Britain and Ireland 92 (1): 73–85. https://doi.org/10.2307/2844322.

Strenski, Ivan. 2014. Malinowski and the Work of Myth. Princeton, UNITED STATES: Princeton University Press. http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/unm/detail.action?docID=1700296.

Sturtevant, W C. 1966. “Anthropology, History, and Ethnohistory.” Ethnohistory 13 (1/2): 1–51. http://libproxy.unm.edu/login?url=https://search.ebscohost.com/login.aspx?direct=true&db=ant&AN=XRAI1957-79-25479&site=eds-live&scope=site.

Susan Kellogg, author. 1991. “Histories for Anthropology: Ten Years of Historical Research and Writing by Anthropologists, 1980-1990.” Social Science History, no. 4: 417. https://doi.org/10.2307/1171462.

Thomas, Keith. 1963. “History and Anthropology.” Past & Present, no. 24 (April): 3–24.

Tylor, Edward Burnett. 1883. Primitive Culture :Researches into the Development of Mythology, Philosophy, Religion, Language, Art and Custom /. 3d American, From the 2d English ed. New York : http://hdl.handle.net/2027/hvd.hn6blh.




