Elena Farmin

**The Intellectual Status of History**

In his 1891 essay “The Significance of History,” Frederick Jackson Turner wrote “The conceptions of history have been almost as numerous as the men who have written history” (Stern 1956, 198). Individual historians and different schools of thought both have their own views on the proper methods and purpose of history, as a result of the time periods when their ideals were formed. History, being a field of study that has existed for thousands of years, has evolved not just in terms of how it is conducted, but also in its intellectual status. Intellectual status in this context refers to how history has been categorized with regards to other branches of knowledge. Prior to the nineteenth century, history was a well-studied subject, but not an academic discipline in its own right; after professionalization (when it became an established field of study), history continued to experience massive paradigm shifts that determined the subject’s relevance not just in academia but in society. 

The fifth century BCE Greek historian Herodotus owes his moniker of “the father of history” to the “proto-history” of non-Greek civilizations. “Proto-history” refers to the tradition of ancient societies recording events on the walls of temples, palaces, or tombs, or on clay and stone tablets (which the Mesopotamians did), or on paper documents that were kept in temple archives (which the Egyptians did); this was more of a bureaucratic practice than an art or academic field (Burrow 2007, 3-4). Herodotus states in Histories that his purpose in writing was “so that human achievements may not become forgotten in time, and great and [marvelous] deeds … may not be without their glory …” (Burrow 2007, 13). Like Herodotus before him, Thucydides saw his work as a means of preserving memory of the past without the fantastical elements of poetic narratives, such as the gods and monsters seen in the epics of Homer, making narrative pasts more grounded and human (Popkin 2016, 27). Being the “father of history,” Herodotus gave the practice its name which comes from historia, the Ancient Greek word for “inquiry” (Burrow 2007, xiii). This came from Herodotus’ method of acquiring information for his narratives: interrogating people who worked in the Egyptian temples where records were kept by having them read the documents to him (since he could only read Greek) (Burrow 2007, 4-5). In the Roman world about a century later, the likes of Polybius, Livy, and Tacitus, would continue this tradition with a wider scope. These historians developed what is know today as a national history, focusing on past events that occurred beyond the confines of a city or city-state. Unlike Herodotus and Thucydides, Roman historians wrote about events that transpired long before the earliest memory of any living person (even the historian) (Popkin 2016, 31-32). It is important to note that these ancient scholars were of a not necessarily wealthy but respectable family background, meaning that they had the resources to travel to record-keeping facilities in other parts of the then-known world and the education to interpret historical records. Their works were also meant for a limited, educated audience. While the writings of these scholars are now seen as the beginning of the field of history, the writers themselves just saw their work as a continuation of the philosophical tradition of preserving the past.

With a new world religion came new historiographical innovations. By the fourth century, the Roman Empire had become Christianized, along with the “barbarian” (non-Roman) peoples in the centuries to follow. While the scholars of the former Roman and Hellenistic Worlds viewed historical writings as the continuation of a philosophical tradition, medieval Christian historians used their works to promote a theological tradition. Medieval Christian historiography propagated the theological idea of God’s divine plan, in which all events in human history were leading up to some great event: the second coming of Jesus Christ and the end of the world (Popkin 2016, 36). The “disintegration of the western Roman Empire” led to the loss of ancient knowledge and the deterioration of education among the laity, so it was the task of monastics and other religious authorities to not only construct medieval narratives but also preserve ancient historiography (Popkin 2016, 39-41). Works such as Gregory of Tours’ The History of the Franks (sixth century) and Bede’s Ecclesiastical History of the English People (c. 735) told the story of a nation of peoples while also maintaining themes of Christian teachings and victory over pagan traditions (Burrow 2007, 187-214). Western medieval historical writing also took on a more secular form as chronicles and annals, such as the Anglo-Saxon Chronicle (ninth through twelfth centuries), which recorded important events and served as valuable sources but lacked the literary qualities of ancient historical works (Burrow 2007, 217-219). However, even secular historical accounts were compiled by people of the clergy and meant for a Western and Christian audience.

More shifts came in the early modern era, also known as the Renaissance and the Enlightenment. The new historical traditions developed during the fifteenth, sixteenth, seventeenth, and eighteenth centuries came about due to “the secularization of thought, the growth of science, and the questioning of all systems embodying eternal truths” (Stern 1956, 12). The reverence that Renaissance historiography held for the Ancient World can be seen in “the revival of classical learning known as humanism,” which was modelled on the writings of historians like Livy (Burrow 2007, 260). The Florentine historians Francisco Guicciardini and Niccolo Machiavelli wrote histories that solely focused on the political affairs of humans, Guicciardini’s History of Italy (1530s) and Machiavelli’s Florentine History (1532), moving away from the theological nature of medieval historiography (Burrow 2007, 261-279). While history at that point was still considered a “learned enterprise … practiced by erudites” (Iggers 1984, 9), the Renaissance witnessed the first instances of the popularization of history. The invention of the printing press by Johannes Gutenberg (c. 1460) and the historical plays of William Shakespeare (late sixteenth/early seventeenth centuries) allowed the laity and non-elite to have greater access to historical knowledge than in prior eras (Popkin 2016, 53-55). Enlightenment historiography was characterized by the leading scholars of the day, such as Voltaire “[rebelling] against the prevailing ideals and forms of historiography” in favor of a “secular and naturalistic history which would depict the life and spirit of peoples, their art, science and politics” (Stern 1956, 35). In “On the Usefulness of History,” Voltaire wrote that if modern historical knowledge were “not made familiar” to all learned people then “the disasters of those times of ignorance would infallibly rearise” (Stern 1956, 45). In the spirit of revolution (thanks to the revolutions in America and France in the later half of the eighteenth century), historians such as Barthold Goerg Niebuhr (Stern 1956, 46-47) and Edward Gibbon (Popkin 2016, 63-65) writing accounts that were more critical of religion and the Ancient World. By the end of the eighteenth century, despite all these new developments, history was still a line of work more in the vein of philosophy and practiced by an educated few.

Then came a German historian by the name of Leopold von Ranke. German scholars in the nineteenth century developed historicism: an intellectual movement that analyzed human agency, change, and the “unique individuality” of each historical era, breaking from previous historiographical models of universality and general truths (Popkin 2016, 69). While working as a professor at the University of Berlin during that time, Ranke not only developed a more scientific approach to the study of history but also contributed to its professionalization by developing a new method and redefining the purpose of a historian’s work. The Rankean method involved reconstructing past events from historical documents (what we would now call primary sources) and critically assessing said sources. This was a great contrast to the work of G.W.F. Hegel, a German philosopher who took a more speculative approach to understanding history (Popkin 2016, 75-77). History students attending universities were previously taught solely through lectures, but Ranke developed the research seminar, which allowed for students to both learn a historical narrative and come to their own conclusions on the narrative through engagement with and critical examination of sources (Popkin 2016, 77-78). While Ranke held that historians should be critical of their sources, he rejected moralizing historical narratives since that defeated the purpose of the “historian’s objectivity” (Gil 2009, 384). Unlike the historians of the Enlightenment, Ranke did not believe that history should be judged according to contemporary principles, nor should it be shaped “into a story with a moral lesson for the present”. Rather, historians should strive to “show what actually happened” (Popkin 2016, 76). Once history had become a discipline in its own right, the work of professional historians would be judged by a community of other professional historians (as opposed to the elite, both secular and religious). One such group was the American Historical Association (Popkin 2016, 78-79). Prior to the founding of the American Historical Association in 1884, the state of historical studies in America was abysmal: fewer than twenty universities had history professors, history textbooks were “wretched,” and “school libraries were almost unknown.” American students who studied in Germany brought the Rankean method back with them, vastly improving historical scholarship in the United States (Jameson 1934, 1-2). While professional history owes much to Ranke and his methods, they were not without their downsides and critics. Heinrich von Treitschke used what he learned from Ranke to craft a nationalist history that combined jingoism with anti-Semitism, leading Germany down the slippery slope towards its involvement in World War I and the eventual rise of Nazism (Popkin 2016, 82-83). Another fellow German, Friedrich Nietzsche, criticized contemporary historians for “[succumbing] to a lifeless scientism” in his 1874 essay “Use and Disadvantage of History” (Stern 1956, 20). In spite of this, Ranke made it so that historians were engaging in their own field of study, not just some academic pursuit that was a conglomerate of philosophical, theological, and literary traditions.

The twentieth and twenty-first centuries saw enough paradigm shifts to make professionals and the public re-evaluate historical traditions of the last few centuries. While German economist and philosopher Karl Marx lived during the same era as Ranke, his ideas on history did not gain momentum until the early twentieth century. Marxism, which defined eras by a “progressively more advanced mode of production” and the people’s relationship towards said mode, would influence the regimes of entire nations, notably Soviet Russia and Communist China (Green and Troup 1999, 35-36). The Annales school, established in Strasbourg, France in 1929, sought to create a “total history”: a history that examined the importance of all aspects of human society (politics, economics, culture, language, etc.) (Green and Troup 1999, 87). The decolonization of the world following World War II initiated postcolonial history, which sought to analyze the legacy of imperialism on conquered societies while also proving that said societies had rich historical traditions before the forced influence of Eurocentrism (Green and Troup 1999, 277-285). Then along came postmodernism, a school of thought developed in the second half of the twentieth century that decided to throw all previous historiographical traditions out the window by challenging the nature of historical truth. With all the differing perspectives and the fact that historians before Ranke did not even bother to cite or test the accuracy of their sources, postmodernism holds that there is no purely universal, or objective, historical truth (Southgate 2005, 107). In addition to these new schools of thought, historical knowledge became even more readily available to the general public through museums, libraries, national archives, popular books, and greater numbers of people receiving a formal education (Popkin 2016, 1040. The advent of film, and later television, would add to the popularization of history with documentaries and fictionalized representations of past events reaching a wide audience (Popkin 2016, 178-179). Various civil rights movements and disillusionment with authority brought on by the Vietnam War led to professionals and the public alike calling for historical narratives and discourses on women, people of color, LGBTQ+ people, and civilizations beyond the Western world (Popkin 2016, 127-149). During the final decades of the twentieth century, the public was having discussions and “heated debate[s] … about the interpretation of history” with professionals; scholars like Francis Fukuyama were concerned about these “history wars” (Popkin 2016, 153-162). However, these discourses demonstrated “society’s growing demand for history” and how in the last two centuries “the Western world has become intensely historical-minded” (Stern 1956, 11). History was no longer a pursuit of scholars but something that ordinary people could engage in, whether through debate or study.

History itself has had quite an interesting history in terms of how scholars and society have viewed it. In the more than two millennia since Herodotus inquired about events that occurred in his own lifetime, the field of history has seen dramatic changes in authorship and intellectual status. Until the nineteenth century, history was seen a continuation of philosophical, literary, and theological traditions that could only be written by an educated elite or a religious or secular authority. After becoming its own unique discipline, history continued to experience increasing diversification and popularization; expanding the previously limited authorship while also cementing history’s relevance in society.

**Bibliography**

Burrow, John. 2007. *A History of Histories*. New York: Alfred A. Knopf.

Gil, Thomas. 2009. “Leopold Ranke.” In *A Companion to the Philosophy of History and Historiography*, 383-392. Hoboken: Wiley Blackwell.

Green, Anna and Troup, Kathleen (eds.). 1999. *The Houses of History: A Critical Reader in Twentieth-Century History and Theory*. New York: New York University Press.

Iggers, Georg G. 1984. *New Directions in European Historiography*. Middletown: Wesleyan University Press. 

Jameson, J. Franklin. 1934. “Early Days of the American Historical Association, 1884-1885.” *The American Historical Review* 40, no. 1 (Oct.): 1-9. JSTOR Journals, EBSCOhost (accessed April 6, 2018).

Popkin, Jeremy D. 2016. *From Herodotus to H-Net: The Story of Historiography*. New York: Oxford University Press. 

Southgate, Beverly. 2005. *What Is History For?* New York: Routledge.

Stern, Fritz. 1956. *The Varieties of History: From Voltaire to the Present*. Cleveland: The World Publishing Company. 
