### Emily Delcoure
# Historiography from the Bronze Age to Classical Greece (3300-400 BCE)

For millennia the history of the world and its people was told by mouth. Events were engraved in minds, not in stone, and stories shared for the sake of entertainment and lessons--the only sources being memories. When written records became more common, the known history was written down—in its most recent form—with the same number of sources as its oral predecessor. Truth was interchangeable with belief, and all history supported those beliefs; proving that even written history was recorded for less-than-neutral reasons (Popkin, 2016, 25). So how did history change during the time of the Greeks to allow for a person like Thucydides—a man that strove for the most accurate recollection of every event he wrote on—to even exist? This is the question Historiography seeks to answer. The Grecian historians did not just appear, they were formed by the historians that came before them, and the historiographical traditions that those ancient writers established. The Classical Period (700 BCE-400 CE) was defined by writers such as Herodotus, Thucydides, Pluto, Polybius, and Livy that defined history as we know it today. Before them, though, there was an *incalculable number of historians* from all across the known world that *influenced* their works and *inspired* their passionate retelling of history, and **they are equally as important to the evolution of contemporary historiographical traditions as those in the Classical Period**.

Human history began, to our knowledge, on the continent of **Africa**. From Africa we see the **oral traditions of prehistory** emerge. African historiography typically covered past activities of people, because they believed that those past activities largely influenced their present and their future (Ajaegbo, 1990, 139). African creation of culture was built around the concepts of “**continuity and change, order and purpose**” in regards to their place and role within the environment (Olaniayan, 1982, 2). Their belief in recounting the stories of the past was also **defined by their communion** with the *gods*, the *dead*, the *living*, and their *future generations* (Ajaegbo, 1990, 139). They used these histories to explain the origins of their communities, ancestors, and the gods. The accuracy of their histories was important so they created more **reliable, pneumonic, ways of retelling stories**—in lieu of just remembering—with myths, songs, proverbs, legends, riddles, poetry, and plays. While it was for the benefit of their culture as a whole these practices were perpetrated by kings, priests, diviners, elders, and “men of intelligence” (Ajaegbo, 1990, 140). Though Egypt does lay on the continent of Africa, and for the most part their histories conform to these tenants of African historiography. They were one of the first civilizations to develop a system of writing, and progressed far past the oral traditions of the rest of Africa.

Egypt’s written history began at almost the same historical instant that they also organized themselves politically. This political power came to its pinnacle under the combined ruling of Upper and Lower Egypt under a “divine monarchy” that would drive their historiographical traditions from 3000 BCE onward (Lichtheim, 1963, 33). Most surviving sources were **about the pharaohs** or were literary projects **monetarily supported** by the money chamber of the pharaoh himself (Lichtheim, 1963, 36; Dillery, 1999, 97). It is less surprising then, that most of Egyptian history before the Ptolemaic Kings or Roman rule was *chronologized* and *outlined* by the **31 dynasties of pharaohs** (Lichtheim, 1963, 33). In lieu of periods with descriptive titles (i.e. Renaissance, Industrial Revolution), the Egyptians literal time *revolved* around the pharaoh—and the pharaoh revolved around the gods. His (or her) power was directly descended from the gods. All aspects of life were controlled by the gods. Stories of human creation, who joined the two kingdoms, why the Nile (source of life) inundated each year, what made the sun rise each day were are chronicled in their written histories as *historical fact*—things that someone witnessed occurring—**an unarguable truth** (Budge, 1971). These truths were relatively unquestioned until Roman rule and the subsequent conversion to Abrahamic religions (David, 2002). Though Egyptian culture ultimately intermingled with Greek and Roman culture, its influence on Greek historiographical traditions is less clear, hence its location on this particular breakdown of human history.

Although the civilization of Mesopotamia--and the **Babylonians** that inhabited the region--appeared first, **their influence on Greek historians is much more direct**. From the Babylonians came Assyrian historiographical traditions, and from Assyria came the Persians (Olmstead, 1916, 2). The Persians of Grecian times only vaguely resembled the Babylonians or Assyrians in culture, but their traditions of using history stayed with the Persian Empire well into the modern era (Jamzadeh, 2014, 159). The origins of their history and culture were controlled by specific rhetoric, ideologies, and propaganda were key in sharing the events and traditions of their day (Bahrani, 2003, 68). Babylonian historiography can be broken down into two types of writing: **kings commemorating** their buildings to the gods; and **lists of kings**, their time of reign, with the occasional **legend or tales of war**. The Assyrians adopted only one of these traditions: **commemorating buildings the king built to the gods** (Olmstead, 1916, 2). Things changed for the Assyrians in ~1100 BCE under Tiglath Pileser I, when **annalistic traditions**, a typically Roman approach to history that had roots in Persian historiography, began to appear on the inscriptions of buildings. These “display” inscriptions evolved from architectural information to lists of areas conquered, who did it, and when (Olmstead, 1916, 4-6). It was this tradition of **shaming the conquered and rewarding the conqueror** that the Persians—and subsequently the Greeks—took away from the Assyrian empire (McCants et al., 2011, 16-17). The best example of this can be seen in the Persian acceptance of Alexander the Great as their leader after he took control from King Darius. In the histories that survived it is said that Darius accepted Alexander as the King of Persia *before* he was completely defeated because of Alexander’s treatment of Darius’ female family members. This **propaganda** on the *chivalry* and *gentlemanly* nature of Alexander cites “the people” as the original source (Jamzadeh, 2014, 7).

The term “historian” itself takes on a different meaning in Pre-Classical Ancient history. A historian could be **any one person**, a community of people using **collective memory** to piece together their world, or one single man—above them all—set to write a **one-sided history** of an entire population based **on the actions of a single man* (or, very rarely, a woman). A historian once was simply the person that was currently telling a story—be it myth, legend, or actual events of their lifetime. In the Classical Period that all changed. Historian **became a specialized position**, the position itself suggested *knowledge* and *analysis skills* that no “regular” person naturally had. The issues that came with applying such skills to work like Homer’s *the Iliad,* like distance in time from original sources or the fantastical nature of the work became the distinct difference between pre-classical history and the data-based contemporary history that has emerged since (Marincola, 1997, 118). The transition from creation myth to epic poems, then to chronicled history strikes the modern historian as abrupt but there was more continuity than change: “**even where Greek historians define themselves against epic they share common ground with it**” (Maciver, 2012, 15).

Herodotus, the man Cicero considered the “father of history,” never explicitly cited previous or contemporary historians as his inspiration for **a more fact-based record of history**—neither does Thucydides. Historical tradition was the only “*known*,” sources of those traditions were relatively unknown, and trying to cite those sources would have detracted from the historical writing that was developing. Still these two—and many after them—took their inspirations from societies as a whole: Egypt, Persia, and previous Greek writers. They saw these versions of history and found better, more accurate, ways to write them (Popkin, 2016, 26-27). Greek historiography is the dialectical synthesis of **creation myth and legend versus the intellectual integrity** that is characteristic of Classical Greece (Popkin, 2016, 28). Though the subjects of history remained the same throughout Greek writing, the way the subjects were written on changed dramatically. No longer would there be only Homer’s version of the Trojan War and its outcomes—or one perspective on anything for that matter (Momigliano, 1966, 1).

Not that there was any question in Greek minds about the events that took place during Homer’s epic poems, as many accepted the accounts as pure fact—*no matter* their fantastical content (Maciver, 2012, 14). It is here, at this intersection—this meeting of thesis and antithesis—that Greek historiography lingers, and why there was further evolution as time marched into Roman rule. Greek historiography was an essential stepping stone on this march, for many reasons. The depiction of conquerors as heroes, heroes as chivalrous, and chivalry reserved for upper statesmen was a classic of both Greek and Roman stories and histories (Sorek, 2012, 64-66). 

The Greek historians that followed Herodotus and Thucydides were all but paralyzed by the accounts necessary to write a complete history. Herodotus himself had nine volumes of his *Histories*, a work that was in progress throughout his entire life—clear through to his death. It could be supposed that Herodotus could never complete his work because of his thoroughness, and the amount of detail he included. This commitment to recording facts made for long-winded histories of what was known, and near silence on [regions beyond their knowledge](https://github.com/unm-historiography/2018-spring/blob/master/essays/The%20Final%20-%20No%20Joke%20-%20Real%20Deal/Eden-Medieval%20Islamic%20Historiography%20FINAL.md) (Popkin, 2016, 27; Sorek, 2012, 21-24). Chronicles of events also became common after Herodotus and Thucydides, a chronicle ***with* analysis of motive and character-traits** of historical figures had that were particularly **admirable to the state** was formed under Roman historians (Sorek, 2012, 68).

The best known example Greeks transferring traditions to Rome is seen in the work of Polybius. As the contact of transfer between Greek and [Roman traditions](https://github.com/unm-historiography/2018-spring/blob/master/essays/The%20Final%20-%20No%20Joke%20-%20Real%20Deal/Louisa-RomanFinalDraft.md) Polybius was *instrumental* in bringing the attention to detail, and analysis of events, into the Roman world. He did this simply by writing, as he was of Greek descent but was living “captive” on Roman soil for most of his life (Sorek, 2012, 76-80). The evolution of historiographical traditions would be conceived at these crossroads, **forever towing [the line](https://github.com/unm-historiography/2018-spring/blob/master/essays/The%20Final%20-%20No%20Joke%20-%20Real%20Deal/Michael%20-%20Intro%20and%20Importance.md) between narrative** (link to Foucault essay) **and [truth](https://github.com/unm-historiography/2018-spring/blob/master/essays/The%20Final%20-%20No%20Joke%20-%20Real%20Deal/Eden-Medieval%20Islamic%20Historiography%20FINAL.md)**—an idea that modern historians like Beverly Southgate, Michel Foucault, and Alun Munslow still grapple with. Greece was not the *birthplace* of history, but it certainly was its nursery; where it grew, learned to write, and learned the very important difference between legend and real life.

## Bibliography
Ajaegbo, D.I. 1990. “AFRICAN HISTORIOGRAPHICAL TRADITIONS FROM THE EARLIEST TIMES TO THE SECOND WORLD WAR: AN ANALYTICAL SURVEY.” *Transafrican Journal of History* 19: 139–51.
Bahrani, Zainab. 2003. *The Graven Image: Representation in Babylonia and Assyria.* Philadelphia, UNITED STATES: University of Pennsylvania Press. http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/unm/detail.action?docID=3441816.
Baragwanath, Emily, and Mathieu de Bakker. 2012. *Myth, Truth, and Narrative in Herodotus.* Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2012.
Breisach, Ernst. n.d. “Historiography: Ancient, Medieval, & Modern.” *Acls Humanities E-Book, Acls Humanities e-Book.* Accessed April 17, 2018. http://quod.lib.umich.edu/cgi/t/text/pageviewer-idx?cc=acls;c=acls;idno=heb04782.0001.001;node=heb04782.0001.001%3A4;rgn=div1;view=image;page=root;seq=19.
Coleman, Janet. 1992. *Ancient and Medieval Memories: Studies in the Reconstruction of the Past.* Cambridge (England); New York: Cambridge University Press, 1992.
Curtis, John, and St John Simpson. 2010. *The World of Achaemenid Persia: History, Art and Society in Iran and the Ancient Near East: Proceedings of a Conference at the British Museum 29th September-1st October 2005.* London; New York: I.B. Tauris; New York: Distributed in the U.S. and Canada exclusively by Palgrave Macmillan, 2010.
David, Rosalie. 2002. *Religion and Magic in Ancient Egypt.* https://www.goodreads.com/work/best_book/790424-religion-and-magic-in-ancient-egypt.
Dillery, John. 1999. “The First Egyptian Narrative History: Manetho and Greek Historiography.” *Zeitschrift Für Papyrologie Und Epigraphik* 127: 93–116.
Donohue, A. A., and Mark D. Fullerton. 2003. *Ancient Art and Its Historiography.* Cambridge University Press.
Gill, Christopher, T. P. Wiseman, and E. L. Bowie. 1993. *Lies and Fiction in the Ancient World.* Exeter, Devon, UK: University of Exeter Press, 1993.
Howe, Timothy, Sabine Müller, and Richard Stoneman. 2016. *Ancient Historiography on War and Empire.* Havertown: Oxbow Books, 2016.
Jamzadeh, Parivash. 2014. *Alexander Histories and Iranian Reflections: Remnants of Propaganda and Resistance.* Leiden, NETHERLANDS: BRILL. http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/unm/detail.action?docID=1012774.
Lichtheim, Miriam. 1963. “Ancient Egypt: A Survey of Current Historiography.” *The American Historical Review* 69 (1): 30–46. https://doi.org/10.2307/1904412.
Liotsakis, Vasileios, and Scott Farrington. 2016. *The Art of History: Literary Perspectives on Greek and Roman Historiography.* Berlin/Boston, GERMANY: De Gruyter, Inc. http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/unm/detail.action?docID=4707940.
Maciver, Calum Alasdair, Lloyd Llewellyn-Jones, and John Marincola. 2012. *Greek Notions of the Past in the Archaic and Classical Eras: History Without Historians.* Edinburgh Leventis Studies. Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press. http://libproxy.unm.edu/login?url=http://search.ebscohost.com/login.aspx?direct=true&db=nlebk&AN=534499&site=ehost-live&scope=site.
Marincola, John. 1997. *Authority and Tradition in Ancient Historiography.* Cambridge; New York, NY, USA: Cambridge Univesity Press, 1997. http://libproxy.unm.edu/login?url=https://search.ebscohost.com/login.aspx?direct=true&db=cat05987a&AN=unm.34704951&site=eds-live&scope=site.
Mccants, William, William F. F. McCants, and William F. McCants. 2011. *Founding Gods, Inventing Nations: Conquest and Culture Myths from Antiquity to Islam.* Princeton, UNITED STATES: Princeton University Press. http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/unm/detail.action?docID=773464.
McNeill, William H. 1986. “Mythistory, or Truth, Myth, History, and Historians.” *The American Historical Review* 91 (1): 1–10. https://doi.org/10.2307/1867232.
Momigliano, Arnaldo. 1966. “Time in Ancient Historiography.” *History and Theory* 6: 1–23. https://doi.org/10.2307/2504249.
Morley, Neville. 1999a. *Ancient History: Key Themes and Approaches.* London, UNITED KINGDOM: Taylor & Francis Group. http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/unm/detail.action?docID=168619.
———. 1999b. *Writing Ancient History*. Ithaca, N.Y.: Cornell University Press, 1999.
Olaniyan, Richard. 1982. *African History and Culture.* Ikeja, Lagos, Nigeria: Longman Nigeria, 1982.
Olmstead, A. T. 1916. *Assyrian Historiography:A Source Study*. Columbia, Mo.: http://hdl.handle.net/2027/coo.31924030373686.
Popkin, Jeremy D. 2016. *From Herodotus to H-Net: The Story of Historiography*. New York; Oxford: Oxford University Press, [2016].
Priestley, Jessica. 2014. *Herodotus and Hellenistic Culture: Literary Studies in the Reception of the Histories*. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2014.
Raaflaub, Kurt A. 2013. *Thinking, Recording, and Writing History in the Ancient World.* Somerset, UNITED STATES: Wiley. http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/unm/detail.action?docID=1557269.
Rengakos, Antonios, and Antonis Tsakmakis. 2005. *Brill’s Companion to Thucydides.* Boston, UNITED STATES: Brill Academic Publishers. http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/unm/detail.action?docID=3004132.
Scanlon, Thomas F. 2014. *Greek Historiography*. Chicester, UNITED KINGDOM: John Wiley & Sons, Incorporated. http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/unm/detail.action?docID=2078739.
Sorek, Susan. 2012. *Ancient Historians: A Student Handbook*. London: Continuum. http://libproxy.unm.edu/login?url=http://search.ebscohost.com/login.aspx?direct=true&db=nlebk&AN=568984&site=ehost-live&scope=site.
Southgate, Beverley C. 2005. *What Is History For?* Psychology Press.
