## How Sites of Memory change and Influcence our view of History

Sites of memory are physical places where past historical events have happened or where people gather together to remember those who have died. There are also based on a individual's own memories of when they learned about a particular historical event. Often these sites are remembered by society at large with events held on certain anniversaries. What events are remembered and how nation-states and individuals see sites of memory are very important, regarding how people remember history and what narrative is being told. The history people learn in school and at museums are important and it shape how people think about the past but sites of memory are just as important. When we see a site dedicated to in memory it an event or an individual person, **it tells us about the culture and society we are in**. Allowing us to learn what they value and wish to remember.

Sites of memory were first suggested by a french sociologist by the name of **Maurice Halbwachs** in 1925. He argued *"that there is such a thing as a collective memory, shared by the members of a given society and that this memory alters over time -- in other words that it becomes its own history"* (Popkin. 149). However, it was not until the 1980s that the idea of sites of memory finally entered the historical debate as Historians began to look at the subject of memory and how it effects history. In 1982, the French historian Pierre Nora published a seven volume series called *Les lieux de memoire* or ("Sites of memory"), that turned history of memory into a historiographical industry (Popkin. 149). For Nora sites of memory could be anything that helped to build national identity, such as physical objects, such as the palace of Versailles, rituals such as celebrating a national holiday, or a sporting event, a particular book or film, a country's flag or actual sites of remembrance (Popkin. 150). These actual sites of remembrance like the large First and Second World War memorials and cemeteries in Europe or the small plages many towns through Europe have are all a part of what shapes peoples views of history.

The very simple definition is that **"sites of memory are places where historical remembrance happens"** (winter.314). This is what sites of memory are about, however, there are two more detailed explanations for what sites of memory can be, and that are used in this essay. One is public and the other is how each individual has their own private and personal sites of memory. The public definition is *"sites of memory are places where groups of people engage in public activity through which they express ‘‘a collective shared knowledge . . . of the past, on which a group’s sense of unity and individuality is based"* (Winter, 2010 .312). The private definition for sites of memory is both more complex and simpler. Simpler because it is anywhere someone was when they learned about an historical event. But more complex because it widens what can be considered as sites of memory to almost anything, yet its shows how much memory influence on us and our ideas of the past. Such events as the attacks on the Twin Towers in two thousand one, or where you were when learning results from a presidential election (Farrar, 725) can create this personal sites of memory that are part of the large reactions a country. It creates a memory that will always be tied to the place you were at that time.

Memory is where history and personal views interact. William McNeill writes about the place between history, the truth, and myth, and how they combine to form mythistory that is both history and myth. One could also include memory as something that adds to both history and myths. For how a society remembers its past when looking to the future and it shapes and influences how we respond. This idea of mythistory is particularly important when thinking about Halbwachs's ideas on collective memory. Halbwachs believed that collective or group memory of historical events changed how people remembered the past (Popkin. 149). For McNeill group memory is dangerous as it can lead to a nationalist view of history that does not allow room for multiple points of view or narratives (McNeill. 5-6).

Jay Winter a leading historian on the history of memory argues that the focus on history of memory helped to explain the reason there was such a growth and interest surrounding museums and other historical sites during the 1980s through today (Popkin. 151). Winter writes that *"sites of memory are places where people affirm their faith that history has a meaning"*. People want to reaffirm that what happens today will be remembered in the future. Also by looking at the past we are trying to find meaning and a way to better understand what is happening in the present.

Sites of memory usually mark the loss of life from wars and other violent events, however, that does not mean that they only celebrate military victories. On April 25, Australia and New Zealand, both commemorate the landing of Australian and New Zealand troops in Turkey and the Gallipoli Campaign despite the fact that it was a horrible defect. It is also celebrated as the the nation of Australia came of age (Winter. 16). In the United States the Vietnam war memorial is not to celebrate the war instead it is to remember the people who died during the war and as a place for both family members and strangers to reflect and pay their respects. 

While the topic of sites of memory do deal with some of the same issues that are seen in the History Wars debate. It is seprate from the history wars. The History Wars was on how historical events should be  For sites of memory it is often a less oveise remender of past events and may simply be a part of everyday life. In Europe almost every town has their own monuments or site of remembrance for the men who died in the first and second world wars. Winter's a professor at Cambridge University recounts how he would ask his students what they saw at *"first intersection into town form the railway station" (Winter. 24). Most did not see anything, yet what they were missing was the "town's memorial to World War One, that showed a victorious soldier coming home* (Winter. 324). Winter agrues that the reason most of his students did not see the memorial was that it held no value or importance to them and therefore it was "white noise" (Winter. 324). Most towns and cites have memorials either to local people or memorials commemorating events that the entire world knows about. Some are obvious and impossible to miss while other like the soldier returning home easy to miss.

Sites of memory and collective memory change our view of history as members of a nation. *The events that governments and societies chose to commemorate, the information included, and the very design of the sites all influence how a society remembers their history.* It is at sites of memory that most people interact with the past and historical events. People pass sites of memory everyday whether they are fully aware of them or not. It may be a World War One or Two monuments to the soldiers and citizens who died, or an old fort or the site of a battle. It may even be the place someone was at when they learned about a historical event that happened in their own lifetime. **These personal sites of memory are just as important as the places where nation-states have build large memorials for fallen soldiers or the large cemeteries.** Because it is a person's own views and life experiences that most affect how they see history.For some people sites of memory and places of remembrance may just be a local landmark that is used as a point of reference, or a marker on a long drive or it may even be a plaque on the side of a building one passes everyday. But they all tell a story about the society we live in and what it has decided to remember.

*It is in sites of memory that public history, personal history, politics, and how a nation remembers it past all come together.* These public sites of memory or the collective memory of a country is available  to everyone regardless of whether you agree with what the site is memorializing it is a public place.
It is important to look for the history that surrounds us everyday. **To see what we are missing, what still needs to be remembered and what is waiting to be discovered** I suggest looking closely at your surrounding the next time you leave your home and see if you can find some public sites of memory, that you may have missed in the past.

**Bibliography**  

Farrar, Margaret E. "Amnesia, Nostalgia, and the Politics of Place Memory." Political Research Quarterly 64, no. 4 (2011): 723-35. http://www.jstor.org/stable/23056342.

Green, Anna, and Kathleen Troup. The Houses of History : A Critical Reader in Twentieth-Century History and Theory. New York : New York University Press, 1999., 1999.

Hamilton, Paula. "A Long War: Public Memory and the Popular Media." In Memory: Histories, Theories, Debates, edited by RADSTONE SUSANNAH and SCHWARZ BILL, 299-311. NEW YORK: Fordham University, 2010. http://www.jstor.org/stable/j.ctt1c999bq.24.

McNeill, William H. "Mythistory, or Truth, Myth, History, and Historians." The American Historical Review 91, no. 1 (1986): 1-10. doi:10.2307/1867232.

Popkin, Jeremy D. From Herodotus to H-Net: The Story of Historiography, 2016.

Shanken, Andrew M. "Planning Memory: Living Memorials in the United States during World War II." The Art Bulletin 84, no. 1 (2002): 130-47. doi:10.2307/3177256.

Winter, Jay. "Sites of Memory." In Memory: Histories, Theories, Debates, edited by RADSTONE SUSANNAH and SCHWARZ BILL, 312-24. NEW YORK: Fordham University, 2010. http://www.jstor.org/stable/j.ctt1c999bq.25.
