Marxism and its Historical Significance
Jerome T. Mondragon
When the Age of Enlightenment had just appeared in Europe, the Western world now entered a new age of science, art, and history. It was a time when history was exclusively focused on the accomplishments of religious and royal authority figures (Popkin 2016, p. 57). It was also during this time when industrialization and international dependency began to emerge. Old methods of industry were being replaced with the mass production of goods, a growing economy, and the creation of a new capitalist market. The unfortunate consequence with the rise of industry was the division of classes. As these differences in class became more apparent, the interpretation of history drastically changed because historians now focused on the social and economic disparities that existed. Thus, Marxist movement emerged in the 1800s as a means to represent the disadvantaged class (Marx and Engles 2014, p. 20). 
To understand the movement, it is important to understand its creator. The most important figure of the movement is Karl Marx. He and his contemporary, Frederick Engles, formulated the commanding literature on the subject, _Communist Manifesto_. Devised in the Fall of 2014, the pamphlet was a theoretical and practical program for the emerging Communist Party. Its purpose was to reflect, "the history of the modern working class." The ultimate goal of the working class was to shift the balance of power in their favor by gaining control of the economic and political systems (Marx and Engles 2014, p. 30). Thus, the _Manifesto_ was an important historical outline to initiate social and economic change. 
Social and class differences were nothing new in history. Marx and Engles admitted there has always been a class that has been subservient to another since the Roman Empire (Marx and Engles, 2014, p.89). Enlightenment authors such as Machiavelli focused on the Italian power struggles while presenting the perspective of the common people (Machiavelli, 1532 p.4). What was new in the Marxist era was its emphasis on the _Industrial Revolution as the iconic factor for the social and economic inequalities. E.P. Thompson mentions in Exploitation_, "The physical instruments of production were seen as giving rise in a direct and more-or-less compulsive way to new social relationships, institutions, and cultural modes." (Thompson 1999, p. 46) Marx also mentions, "Modern industry has converted the little workshop of the patriarchal master into the great factory of the industrial capitalists (Marx and Engles 2014, p. 16).” Two classes emerged from this system: the controlling _bourgeoisie_, and the subordinate _proletarians_” (Marx and Engles 2014, p. 10-11). Marxist writing had identified key players that were previously overlooked in previous history writings. 
With two distinct classes identified, __Marxist historians specifically focused on the viewpoint of the worker__. British historian E.P. Thompson describes the plight of the worker by explaining the uneasy relationship between the employee and employer. Initially, the employers are the rulers of their enterprise because they profit from workers' labor by keeping their pay low, and eventually subduing their moral. It's an unjust economic system in place in which the worker can't escape. The employee must retain his job in order to obtain the reproductive needs including food, clothing, and shelter. (Rockmore 2016, p. 490) Workers are unable to quit because they feared gaining a bad reputation and not being rehired. The employee ultimately submits to his employer's bidding and endures their horrible abuse (Thompson, 1999 p. 54). They are victims of the emerging yet perpetual industrial system. Indeed, Thompson also identifies __the factory__ as the iconic symbol of oppression which provides a glimpse of working conditions in 19th Century England. The factory created the dreadful working conditions which were attributed to the increase of manufacture, rising population in the cities, and technological innovations (Thompson 1999, p. 47). The factories were worse than those experienced by plantation slaves in the American South. (Thompson p.55) Whereas slaves work outside and might get a cool breeze, factory workers are locked in hot and unventilated rooms for hours with no rest. (Thompson 1999, p. 55) Just as Marxist historical writing had identified two distinct classes, the workers’ were emphasized to highlight their economic and social disparities. 
Marxism was no doubt influenced by the Enlightenment movement and the creation of the printing press. Events such as the 1789 French Revolution demonstrated that ordinary people were active participants of history and they were control of their own destiny (Popkin 2016, p. 71). The printing press created by Johannes Guttenberg increased the quantity and distribution of written texts to the public (Popkin 2016, p. 53-54). Marxist literature and its ideas spread like wildfire across the world because it related to the desperate working class (Lenin 2013, p. 20-21). However, the ruling class had exclusive control of what was read and heavily edited literature that was produced. It took brilliant Marxist authors, such as Vladimir Lenin, to find creative methods, which included disguising their true meaning of messages (Lenin 2013, 20-21). Therefore, Marxist history such as from Vladimir Lenin was limited or diluted during the early 20th Century in order to escape government censors.
What makes Vladimir Lenin unique to historiographical literature is his passion and dedication to the cause. B.B. Kendrick admits that, "...no proposition is more susceptible of historical truth than that there is a tendency for various economic groups to become aware of their class interests and to work consciously for the fulfillment of ends which they consider good” (Marx and Engles 2014, p. 27). In _What is to be Done?_ written in 1913 by Lenin, he mentioned that the "role of vanguard can be fulfilled only by a party that is guided by an advanced theory (Lenin 2013, p. 28). Thus, it took a charismatic yet intelligent individual to awaken the masses from their class ignorance. The tone of his writing is authoritative yet condescending which was necessary to awaken the workers, trade unions, and peasants into class consciousness. (Lenin 2013, p. 31-35) Through his his captivating writings, Lenin was able "emancipation of the workers" and abolition of old systems as the Manifesto had decreed. (Marx and Engles 2014, p. 6, 20). This event drastically altered the historiography context because his commanding narrative was able sway his contemporaries into political action. 
Western 20th Century historians like Gordon Watkins, Emile Vandervelde, and E.P. Thompson, offer their own perspective and interpretation of Marxism from their own unique countries. As noted in the Enlightenment era, nationalism was on the rise in the 18th Century as countries attempted to preserve their own cultures and unique identities (Popkin 2016, p. 70). Believe it or not, but Joseph Stalin was quite the expert on nationalism. A disciple of Lenin and avid Marxist, Stalin meticulously described the requirements of nationhood. In Marxism and the _National Question_, he described nationhood as a "historically constituted, stable community of people, formed on the basis of a common language, territory, economic life and psychological make-up manifested in a common culture” (Stalin, 12-13). This is similar from how Marx understood how Marxism in which they differ in separate countries (Marx and Engels 2014, p. 20). These additional factors explain how Marxism was accepted and inevitably successful in some countries, and not successful in others. For example, Russian Marxism literature eventually reached and inspired workers throughout Europe and the United States (Watkins 1920, p. 20). It was seen in the West when in 1919, 54,000 people voted for the Communist Party during the 1919 New York primary elections, Americans were aware of class disparities (Watkins 1920, p. 14). Emile Vandervelde argues in the _Ten Years of Socialism in Europe_, that "Whether they have read a line of Marx or not, there is not a coal-miner in Yorkshire...who does not join with the social-democrats (Vandervelde 1925, p. 560)." Vandervelde’s writing indicated that each country will have its own historiographical writing and its own Marxist flavor.
Western historians are different from Eastern European authors because they drastically -__criticize its usefulness in a capitalist society__. Written in 1920, the article _ Revolutionary Communism in the United States_ is a deep criticism of Marxist politics in the U.S. The author Gordon Watkins outlines the function, structure, and demise of the United States’ Communist parties. There were two distinct parties within the country: the Socialist and Communist parties. The Socialists promoted economic change through the use of politics. They encouraged their members to participate in voting, be nominated as public officials, or become elected official to expose Capitalist corruption. The Communists decreed that change can only occur through violent action, like the Russian Revolution (Watkins 1920, p. 20). To do this, they needed help from the unions (Watkins 1920, p. 20). Their strategy was “the conquest of power in the industrial unions may become the starting point of the communist reconstruction of society” (Watkins 1920, p. 26). Easier said than done. Neither the Socialist nor the Communist parties could agree whether economic and political change should be initiated by political intervention or violent struggle (Watkins 1920, p. 19). Watkins sums up the American problem by stating, “[the] American workman are too prosperous to become susceptible to revolutionary political and industrial philosophy (Watkins 1920, p. 14).” Whereas Marxism might have been successful in Europe, it was unfavorable and outright criticized in the United States. 
Marxism was certainly dramatic movement for its time, it could not have occurred without certain conditions to transpire. What set Marxism writing from other historical time periods was its emphasis on social and economic conditions caused by industrial conditions. The movement was a great influence towards post colonialism in the struggle against colonialism and imperial empires (Green and Troup 1999, p. 277-278). With the increased of globalism, rapid manufacturing, and digitalization becomes more apparent in the 21st Century, Marxism is just as relevant as it was two centuries before (van der Linden 2004, p. 136-149). In the _Problem with Historical Interpretation_, B.B. Kendrick mentions "philosophers and the economist can teach us something about the interpretation of history, it can't teach us everything” (Kendrick 1925, 27). History is all about timing and placement! All of these conditions had to be met for the movement to be successful. Marxism was indeed, "revolutionary." for its time. Pun intended.

References

Green, Anna, and Kathleen Troup. The Houses of History : A Critical Reader in Twentieth- Century History and Theory. New York : New York University Press, 1999., 1999. 277-278.

Kendrick, B. B. “THE PROBLEM OF HISTORICAL INTERPRETATION.” The North Carolina Historical Review 2, no. 1 (1925): 19–29.

Korsch, Karl, and Otto Koester. “The Crisis of Marxism.” New German Critique, no. 3 (1974): 7. https://doi.org/10.2307/487734.

Lenin, Vladimir. What Is to Be Done? [Burning Questions of Our Movement]. Martino Fine Books, 2013.

Linden, Marcel van der. “The ‘Globalization’ of Labor and Working-Class History and Its Consequences.” International Labor and Working-Class History, no. 65 (2004): 136–56.

Marx, Karl, Frederick Engles. The Communist Manifesto. International Publishers Co., 2014.

Machiavelli, Niccolò. The prince: with related documents. Edited by William J Connell, 2016.

Popkin, Jeremy D. From Herodotus to H-Net : The Story of Historiography. New York ; Oxford : Oxford University Press, [2016], 2016.

Rockmore, Tom. “Marx.” In A Companion to the Philosophy of History and Historiography, 488–97, 2009.

Spargo, John. “The Influence of Karl Marx on Contemporary Socialism.” American Journal of Sociology 16, no. 1 (1910): 21–40.

Stalin, Joseph. Marxism and the National Question. CreateSpace Independent Publishing Platform, 2013.

Thompson, E.B., "Exploitation", The Houses of History: A Critical Reader in Twentieth-Century History and Theory. New York: New York University Press, 1999., 1999. 44-58.

Vandervelde, Emile. “Ten Years of Socialism in Europe.” Foreign Affairs 3, no. 4 (1925): 556. https://doi.org/10.2307/20028399.
	
Watkins, Gordon S. “Revolutionary Communism in the United States.” American Political Science Review 14, no. 01 (February 1920): 14–33. https://doi.org/10.2307/1945723.

Recommended Readings

Vladimir G. Simkhovitch. “Marxism Versus Socialism. I.” The Academy of Political Science, Political Science Quarterly, Vol. 23, no. No. 4 (June 1908): 652–89. https://doi.org/10.2307/2141322.

Vladimir Zenzinov. “The Bolsheviks and the Peasant.” Council on Foreign Relations, Foreign Relations, 4, no. 1 (October 1925): 134–43. https://doi.org/10.2307/20028428.
