## History, Truth and Mythistory

Mythsitory is the idea that in all histories there is a some form of myth in the recounting of historical events. *That there cannot be one true retelling of history because each historian will pick different events or people to focus on and as a result other historians can clam that it is a myth* **(McNeill.1)**. That it is not what actually happened. While I find McNeill's argument compelling, history is never entirely truthful. Historians will always have their own opinions and perceptions which they use when reading a source or trying to explain the reasoning behind someone's decision. **Most myths are based on some form of truth.**

McNeill spends a large portion of the article looking at how myths and myth-making affect and influence group identity and national remembrance. This results in an "us" vs. "them" narrative that fosters an environment where different histories and myths develop depending on a person's place in the group identity **(McNeill.5)**. I agree that each group in society has a different view of history and they may believe in the myth of that history, however, I do not think that is necessarily a bad thing. Here in the United States each state and region within the state is different. How both the states and people in New York and Massachusetts recall the American Revolution and which events they remember or mythicize is based on their differences. And that does not automatically make mythhisotry bad or fully wrong. Where the danger is, is **in only believing that there is one way to remember an event or that only one group has a right to that history**. People will view history and myth differently based on class, race, and gender and that is understandable. But it is also **important to look for the truth and historical facts to the best of our abilities**.

McNeill writes that most historical writing is *"a mingling of truth and falsehood, blending history with ideology"* that historians will only select the facts that support their view and as a result the reader does not get the full truth **(p.5)**. But he also says that if the study of historiography and is focused only on the study of documents we move *"closer and closer to incoherence, chaos, and meaninglessness"*. Each of these points are interesting and slightly contradictory, because if the goal is to have an unbiased as possible history that does not allow for the historian to add their own ideology it is by focusing only on the sources. Yet McNeill is arguing that if we look only at the sources they become meaningless but the historian by trying to fully understand people and actions behind the sources will inevitably result in a mythisotry. One that is both myth, history and personal ideology.

Overall, McNeill does not give any solutions to the issues and concerns he has but rather ends by saying that mythistory is a good enough way to write and learn about the past.
