### Mythistory, or Truth, Myth, History and Historians Comments

McNeil’s article on _Mythistory_ can best be described as a “cacophonous confusion” (p. 4). While he was referring to historians' ideas competing for attention within other social sciences, it is a useful description for his article. **Throughout _Mythistory_ McNeil criticizes historians, historiography, and society as a whole, yet, McNeil's criticisms lack clarity and viable solutions.**

McNeil's lack of clarity can be seen in his emphasis on group memberships. He claims _"belonging to a tightly knit group makes life worth living”_ but then counters this statement by arguing that the _stronger the group is, the “sharper the break” from humanity as a whole_ (p. 7). Adding to the confusion, he states: "a wise historian will not denigrate intense attachment to small groups. That is essential to personal happiness" (p. 7). If a person is supposed to be a part of a group to find happiness, but it pulls them away from humanity making the world unsafe, _what are we to do?_ His solution is to balance loyalties so that a person isn’t solely committing to one group and hope to make the world safer (p. 7-8). **Unfortunately, _hopefully this works out_ is not a real resolution for his criticism.** His lack of clarity through his paper is a problem because if he cannot identify a solution to the problems he poses there is no way to improve the way he suggests. 

McNeil's article was also confusing due to his perplexing portrayals of historians. At times he holds historians in high regard with substantial power and sacred honor (p. 7, 10).  At others, he argues that historians are tempted to write history as they wish it were because _“human groups like to be flattered”_. He further argues thatby not giving into tempation is to “turn traitor” to the groups they study (p 5-6). He offers no evidence to support any of these judgements. He also implies that historians who do not move toward an ecumenical history have “timid and unenterprising minds” (p. 8). By making these claims, he is not only insulting historians who do not study history they way **he** feels is valuable, but creates the very "us" and "them" narrative between two groups that he claims is dangerous (p. 7). His one solution throughout this article was a shift towards ecumenicity with the goal of emphasizing the **"important aspects of human encounters and omitting irrelevant background noise"** (p. 10). Once again, he does not clarify what he considers important or irrelevant, and reflecting upon his varying opinion of historians it makes me wonder who he thinks is qualified to make those assertions. 
