## Mythistory, or Truth, Myth, History, and Historians - Commentary

History as we know it is incapable of complete objectivity and, whether we like it or not, is always written with an agenda (p. 6). Furthermore, the directive of history is the affirmation of self-definition (p. 5), while perpetuating “us” versus “them” separations (p. 6). In his article, McNeill details the consequential marriage between myth and history, resulting in what he has termed, “Mythstory” (p. 8). The overarching theme of McNeill's article is agreeable and consistent with the logical inclinations of human nature. Keener for critique, is the assertion that historical discrepencies and inconsistencies are self-correcting and, in turn, the "accuracy" of the historical record is ever-improving.
 
“Truth”, which many consider to be essential to the proper reporting of history, is merely the best interpretation of events, analyzed critically, and presented to a like-minded audience (p. 8). This definition is hardly reassuring to those who (perhaps idealistically) desire concrete answers and reliable sources (whatever that means). On several occasions (p. 2, 7, 9), McNeill emphasizes the notion that sources are actually not as important to the writing of history as we may have been taught to believe. He posits instead that history is far more dependent on the presentation – the chronology and patterns – and equally conditional to what facts are omitted, rather than just those included (p. 3). McNeill’s assertions are bold and, at the very least, challenge the long-standing mantras that proper sourcing will make or break an academic piece of historical writing. Though I do believe in the importance of reliable sources (and think that McNeill would agree that some sources are more reliable than others), the author makes a fantastic point insomuch that “facts” without proper context, an appropriate audience, and strategic presentation are useless, confusing, and perhaps even counterproductive.
 
There is much to be said regarding McNeill’s assertion that ideals and histories written for the propagation of such ideals have a way of self-validating (p. 3). I do, however, reject his claim that with time, more accurate and reliable versions of history become available and truer mythstories disseminated. For example, McNeill is hopeful that women and various minorities are unlikely to be forgotten in future histories as they once were (p. 10), but fails to address the possibility that perhaps someday those who wrote histories will become the forgotten group. While this fulfills a certain sense of karma, it does not contribute to the claim that history becomes more “truthful” as time goes on, but rather the claim that history (or rather mythstory) is truly subjective and simply falls on a scale of better and worse representations of facts and perspectives and, furthermore, validates that notion that all history is simply the story-telling of those in positions of power, comparing themselves (most often favorably) to their present subjects.
 
