**Mythistory, or Truth, Myth, History and Historians Comment**

The divisive line created by opposing histories has led to a rise in nationalism and a greater divide between groups. This partiality naturally bleeds into historical documents, such as how many early sources evoke powerful images that cement a ruler’s legacy, regardless of the truth of their reign (p.5). McNeill aims to find what information should be trusted and what should be forgotten (p.5) As a historian himself, McNeill cites the liberal method of free marketplace, the idea that the truth will eventually be fact. However, this process came to a devastating point during the First World War. Nationalism skewed the liberal method for each nation, and millions perished as a result. Even after seeing the effects of nationalism, countries continue to exhibit these tendencies. The past century has seen groups fixated on their beliefs, and willing to wage total war to defend them.

The tendency for people to form groups is a natural aspect of human nature. Not only does it allow for shared truths to find agreement, it provides meaning to one’s life, a commitment other than personal safety. These groups grow and fragment as their society expands, creating even more pollution covering the truth. Attachment to small groups is an essential aspect to modern happiness (p.7). However, it creates a tendency to fall into an echo chamber. This is because of those shared truths, and when, it is easy to dismiss any challenge to your personal beliefs. When one can dismiss an opposing viewpoint so effortlessly, nationalism expands. Today, historians are challenging historical accounts against societies wishes, yet they are purposefully not challenging truths to the point that their audience rejects their message (p.10). Toeing this line for acceptance skews the truth, yet it is the standard in our nationalistic world.

Being under the influence of a nationalistic society alters one’s own pattern recognition (p.2). To acknowledge what one would normally consider “background noise” and give it a second glance is a step to a more accurate ecumenical history (p.2). Even with this effort, it does not alter the fact (or myth) that history is written, found, and revised by individuals with societal and individual bias influencing them. This does not ascertain that life is without fact, but historians must be more vigilant than ever for these biases and aim to never succumb to their own, or the underlying effect of nationalism. 
