## Historiography and Enlightened Thinking

### Andy Mancha

   The **_Enlightenment_** has held a crucial place in the narratives of history and `the` methods ~~within~~ `of` historiography. The social and political situations of the past led to the need for ~~a~~ new ways of thinking with various innovative and revolutionary methods that broke from the historical traditions of past centuries. Historians of the Enlightenment have made significant contributions to historiography and some of those methods are still used or reflected today, including empiricism and secular frameworks. Enlightened rationality established and developed a new, increasingly scientific academic writing of history. The *Age of Enlightenment* `**Age of Enlightenment**`generally serves as a sign of modernity `to what? Maybe rephrase, difficult to understand the context of modernity here`and its influence has continued to play a role in historical methodology, as well as many other disciplines, ~~and~~ `as` can be exhibited through ~~the~~ various ideologies and concepts since the 1800s. ~~This period was one of intellectual discovery as well as religious, political, and social dissent.~~ `This sentence doesn't seems unnecessary.` To fully understand the nature of Historiography today, one must understand preceding notions of methods and ideals including the origins of and lasting effects of the Enlightenment. 

 
 The Enlightenment is considered a product of Europe ~~that~~ `which` spread and became embedded in cultural traditions. `Which aspectof Europe and which cultural tradition? Specify for reader who may not know` Many associate the period to be `one` of hegemonic origins, or controlled by a ruling or dominant, from early modernity to the thoughts of **_Karl Marx_**. `This sentence reads a bit awkwardly, maybe rearrange?`Standard interpretations have viewed the Enlightenment as a perpetuation of Eurocentricity, but ~~its~~ emphasis and value `it` placed on human agency counteracts that conjecture. The **_Renaissance_** and the **_Protestant Reformation_** were catalysts ~~and~~ `that` pushed the philosophical and scientific emphasis on intellectual thought. This lead to a period of political, scientific, historical, and philosophical thinking that undermined the traditional, dominant authority of the monarchy and the Church and paved the way for political and social revolutions, a general “freedom of thought,” rational inquiry, critical thinking, and relative religious tolerance.  `Is there a way to consolidate this sentence in a way that has fewer lists of descriptors?`. Sociologist and philosopher, **_Max Weber_** described the Enlightenment as “mankind’s exit from self-incurred immaturity.” (Conrad, 4) This exit from immaturity resulted in individualistic perspectives, human rights, rationalization, and the “disenchantment of the world”(Conrad, 5). The Enlightenment influenced the entire Western world in various ways.
 
 `This paragraph sets the stage for the rest of the essay, but contains a few claims at the beginning which need citations/sources to support them.`

  
  In France, the movement helped create new conceptions about history and applied new methodological approaches. The Enlightenment writer **_Voltaire_** shifted historical focus from diplomatic military events to social history and emphasized achievements in the arts and sciences (Popkin, 225). ~~He~~ `Voltaire`, as well as many others, focused less on large-scale events and more on culture and small groups. During the Renaissance, history was considered an artistic expression, rather than ~~history as~~ empirical science as it was during the Enlightenment and ~~following it~~ `after`(Leffler, 4). History was previously a branch of moral philosophy and `as such` many intellectuals viewed good history as ~~such that should~~ `focusing` on unchanging perceptions or virtue and vice.  History was both a function and tool to record the “great” deeds of the past, but their vision was limited to political and military events and chronological organization(Leffler, 5). Previous historians sought to amuse and instruct the audience and to break the tedious chronology with speeches and flamboyant orations(Leffler, 5). That same historical writing was religiously centered, but Enlightened ~~thinking was~~ `thinkers were`more “secular” in their orientation than their medieval forbearers, who introduced events by reference to omens(Leffler, 6). `Using "their" in this sentence refers to specific people rather than the concept of "thinking". Either change the first part to thinkers or rewrite to take out the possessive. The sentence also needs to show a clearer dichotomy between omen-focused medieval thinkers and the Enlightenment secularists` Often, uncontrollable forces shaped mans' destiny. `Vague, are you refering to the previous writings of the medieval schokars?` The *Enlightenment* can be used both to designate a particular historical period, and refers to a process or pursuit of modernity(Schmidt, 3). The period was chiefly concerned with human society and the physical and moral well-being of individuals(Schmidt, 6). This required the exclusion of other traditional lines of thought. `Citation`
   
   Enlightened thinkers in Britain, France, and throughout Europe, embraced the notion that humanity could be improved through rational change ~~through~~ `use "via" instead since "through" is already used in this sentence` a production of books, essays, inventions, scientific discoveries, laws, wars, and revolutions. The **_American and French Revolutions_** were directly inspired by `the Enlightenment`and led to ~~Enlightenment~~ `similar` ideals, ~~and~~  `marking` the peak of `the Enlightenemnt's` influence, as well as, defining the beginning of its decline (Sonenscher, 12). In regards to human progression and intellect, education and history are ongoing processes that never cease to hold significance, because human being place a major emphasis on knowing about and attempting to understand the world around them. `Source/citation needed` Historians have used the Enlightenment as an opportunity to study the transmission of ideas; perpetuating interest in historiography itself. This accumlation of ideas encompasses and includes analysis on how ideas were transmitted (Burnson, 10). The increasingly literate public and the widespread availability of printed material assisted in the spread of ideas ~~with speed and accuracy.~~ This was due to the invention of the *printing press* by *Johannes Gutenberg* in 1460 ~~and~~ `which` eventually led to a major change in the way texts `were` circulated and expanded access of historical material to the masses (Popkin, 55). The accesibility and movement of ideas has shaped society from this point forward.

  
  Various historical events and evolved notions `which notions?` ~~led to, and~~ impacted the Age of Enlightenment, which in turn changed historiographical concepts and is still ~~present and~~ relevant today. Renaissance humanism was the system of thought that attached `the` importance of knowledge to humans, rather than divine or supernatural matters, ~~which~~ `and` became the ~~dominate~~ `dominant` framework `for` writing and interpreting historical ~~info~~ `information` during the Early Modern Era (Popkin, 49-50). The Protestant Reformation divided Europeans in a social and educational context (Popkin, 52-53). `this sentence needs to tie in better with the Renaissance humanism, seems a bit out if place otherwise` The critical methods of historical writing and the rejection of authority for the bible `during this time` foreshadowed the major intellectual movement of the 18th century (Popkin, 60). `Is there where humanism ties in?`The Enlightenment also created a “quarrel of the ancient and the moderns,” in that previous historians thought that antiquity was the pinnacle of human achievement, but Enlightened thinkers felt new and progressive history could produce history that was equally as masterful (Popkin, 60).

  
  Also known as the **_Age of Reason_**, the Enlightenment developed a unique theory of practice. The practice relied on the **_inductive method_** and generally practitioners believed that technological advancement and the advancement of civilization ran parallel to each other. Enlightened historians also redefined the concept of **_linear time_**. Sociology formulated models or types and general patterns of social events, whereas history aims at the causal analysis and causal attribution of individual actions, structures, and personalities that have cultural significance. This is a reflection within the *Marxist* notion of teleological construction of linear narrative about the past leading up to a pre-defined and end point or goal (Green and Troup, 37).`This sentence is a litle hard to read and understand clearly.` From the Enlightenment, Marxist theory evoked more insight into social history, rather than strictly the history of the elite, such as royalty, military leaders, or the clergy.`Are you saying that Marx derives his ideas from the Enlightenment or that he was an Enlightenment thinker?`  The application of the scientific method to history was crucial during this period. **_Voltaire_** believed history was a means to study the mistakes of the past to advance progress and that it was a battle between truth and error(Conrad, 12). History became a guide for human beings to understand, react, and alter paths.

   
   The concepts and frameworks of the Enlightenment led to many other evolved and revolutionary methods and techniques, within the historical profession. **_Scientific empiricism_**, a concept coined by **_Francis Bacon_**, ~~and eventually furthered and emphasized by **_Leopold von Ranke_**~~ was a method that radically broke from traditional historiographical methods. Leopold von Ranke `furthered this concept. He` did not focus on the interactivity of society, ~~and~~ `but instead` combined pre-existing historical methods with four main principles of scientific historiography such as **_objectivity of historical truth, the priority of facts over concepts, the uniqueness of all historical periods, and the centrality of politics within history_**(Gil, 384-385). Ranke also valued the scientific approach and new methods of historical research, ~~including and~~ `such as` firmly establishing the importance of use of original documents and the objective reporting of the information provided (Popkin, 77). The **_Humanist movement_** of the 19th century emphasized the value of human agency, individually and collectively, as well as, rationalism and empiricism over superstition or dogma. These non-religious movements aligned with secularism. The concept of human agency continued to develop in the next two centuries, ~~which focused~~ `focusing` on the basis aspects of human existence and foundation for ethics and society is autonomy and moral equality (Coleman, 4). Stemming from the concepts of human agency and empiricism, innovation within the **_Annales School_**, sought to obtain a *histoire totale*,  `maybe make a reference to other student’s paper about the Annales School or quickly describe it before continuing` which consisted of many fields of study ~~and more subjects~~ and overarching connections (Green and Troup, 40). Conceptual and institutional founder **_Lucien Febvre_** incorporated a breakdown of human sciences within history and rejected emphasis of history merely upon diplomatic and political topics (Green and Troup, 87-109). The concept of progress and the expanded definition of linear time followed in the wake of the scientific method ~~and was~~ `as` a reflection of the Enlightenment values, rather than a true attempt to attain historical awareness. Failure of these theories is overshadowed by the success of empiricism, which is responsible for rebuking this mindset and laying the foundation for future “advancement” in Historiography. The Enlightenment was more than a movement or designated moment in time, such as a century or an epoch, but a continued emergence and solidification of modern values ~~and a social history of ideas. ~~

   
   The Enlightenment ~~assisted~~ solidified the importance of knowledge within the public sphere with the development of a new set of institutions such as the coffee house, the salon, Masonic Lodge, and a greater learned society. `citation` Topics of reason, democracy, racial equality, feminism, religious toleration, sexual emancipation, and freedom of expression were shared in these places of educational discourse (Taylor, 15). Intellectual coherence of the Enlightenment may be found in the commitment to understanding and advancing the causes and conditions of human betterment in this world. `can this commitment only be maintained in those institutions? I’m not sure I see the significance of them. Also needs a citation`. The contribution to the modern world and historiography on the modern world may be judged on the intellectual importance of the societies it observed on the clarity of its recommendations for the improvement of the human conditions as it found it. `Redundant use of "modern world. Also clarify contribution here, are you talking about the previous instititions of knowledge discussed above or historiography's contribution via the Enlightenment?`

   Although Enlightenment ideals still run throughout the viens of historiography, many view some of its core concepts as a failure. Many Enlightened ideas contrast the **_Postmodern_** movement and our general way of thinking today. **_Zygmunt Bauman_** describes postmodernity as 'modernity coming to terms with its own impossibility,' in which he implies the acceptance of some sort of failure of the project of modernitt or the failure of the Enlightment project.(Southgate, 1859) The main contrasting belief is that unlike the Enlightenment, postmodernists claim that historical methods cannot obtain certain truth. Secularising tendencies have~~, more many scholars,~~ removed any pretence of providential ordering, or the development in a particular direction(Southgate, 1879). `The` modern historians and ~~other~~ scholars `of today` have arguably lost faith in human beings' ability to make much progress in any direction at all. In our postmodern environment, specifically in academia, there is a loss of order, standards, centers, and foundations, which contrasts Enlightened and modernist thinking and generally reflects an unattainable goal of truth ~~or solidified conclusions.~~ The Enlightenment questioned and altered many traditional methods and concepts within history and historiography and has led to more challenges, ~~questioning, and~~ transforming existing social institutions, practices, and prevailing forms of identity.   
  The Age of Enlightenment shifted central topics within history as well as the methods in which to discuss those topics. Although, postmodernism and contemporary historical methods are vastly different from this period, the idea that history should not ~~only~~ center ~~on~~ solely the members of the elite remains fervent and active. Also, empiricism and objectivity remain a contested, yet staple aspect of historiography. 
  
LB: I think overall you had a lot of great points and information to work with. There were quite a few grammatical errors though (I can’t totally fault you for this because I’m sure I’ve done the same thing). Just be careful to proof read the final version to avoid simple misspellings and such. I noticed a lot of paragraphs contained an extreme number of lists as well as use of the word and in places where it wasn;t needed or the sentences could have been narrowed down. Too many subjects happening within a single sentence, negate the fluff.

FG: you have a lot of important points here! i would say my biggest suggestion is to focus on maintaining a coherent thread throughout your essay--it seems rather cobbled together without a clear path or objective. it's hard to determine if you're aiming for a thematic organization or chronological or both or something else. make sure you're clear about what each paragraph is trying to do and that it clearly states its purpose and flows naturally from the previous one (meaning that you connect them in the first sentence!) All of your outside research is really giving enlightenment historiography more context, but be careful that the extra detail doesn't detract from making a clear argument about the significance of enlightenment historiography.
