Eric Yorty

HIST 491

04/18/2018

# The Annales School

Some of the most innovative and influential historiographic changes in the
twentieth-century came from a group of French historians known as the *Annales
School*. The methods they introduced challenged traditional historical focus from
prominent and powerful individuals and shed light on often overlooked or
dismissed populations and cultures. To achieve this, they developed
methodologies that examined evidence of broader beliefs, ideas, and attitudes of
common everyday people. They also expanded the boundaries of the field of
History by interacting and collaborating with other fields such as the Social
Sciences. This new focus on cultural and economic relationships and not just a
sterile political narrative was a move that they hoped would bring us closer to
what they termed as *Total History*. Throughout the years the Annales School
would continue to evolve and innovate, and distinctive eras of Annales scholars
emerged.

The founding of the Annales School can be traced back to French historians
Lucien Febvre and Marc Bloch who began the Annales journal in 1929 as a response
to the French doctrine of historical narrative that had a monopoly on what the
official historical narratives were.(Green and Troup 1999) They believed that
this was a flawed and biased system that catered to showing political elites in
favorable lights and glossing over or ignoring altogether the histories of less
prominent or privileged individuals. They also had the notion that explicitly
focusing on political narratives left much to be desired by the way economics
and culture interacted with those dynamics. They wanted to create an overview of
how all of the political, social, and economic elements shaped one another and
impacted the relationships within those systems. Febvre’s work included how the
material available to a geographic region affected its social, cultural, and
political development. The premise of Bloch’s studies centered around the
material structures found within a society. Of interest to Bloch were the
formation of hierarchies and how these relationships between elites and
commoners evolved over time. He examined how the notion of the legitimization of
power occurred within society and even became ritualized to reinforce it. The
combining of these two theories and creating a system in which multiple theories
and ideas serve to compliment and expand on one another would be the basis of
the Annales School and its mission to create a *Total History*. As H.L.
Wesseling put it, **“the achievement of the Annales revolution has been that
they exposed this anachronism and introduced the history of man instead of that
of the state.”**(Wesseling 1978)

In the 1940s a student of Febvre’s named Fernand Braudel would lead the wave of
a new era of Annales Scholars with the publication of his book *The
Mediterranean*. In this work Braudel branched out from the Rankean model of
objective empirical research and developed an entirely new concept of
‘historical time.’(Green and Troup 1999) Braudel theorized that there were three
distinct layers of historical time that explained ‘man in his relationship to
the environment’ that Braudel refers to as *duree*s. Each duree is associated
with their respective histories and they all move at a different pace than one
another. He analogized the ocean to help explain this process. The slowest
moving of these three durees has to do with geographical time, which is
understood to be ‘almost imperceptible’ as it changes over the course of
hundreds of years. This type of change deals with things such as climate and
geology. The middle layer of these historical durees is metaphoric of ‘swelling
currents with slow but perceptible rhythms.’ These change more rapidly than the
previous layer and occur in cycles of roughly ten to fifty years. The types of
structures this middle duree is representative of include economic cycles,
trade, population growth and decline, and prices of goods and services. The
third duree is referred to as ‘the ephemera of history’ and is likened to the
crests of foam of an ocean carried by the tides of history’s currents.(Green and
Troup 1999) This third duree mainly is concerned with traditional political
history and diplomatic narratives that dominated the field up until the creation
of the Annales School. Braudel highlighted this type of fast moving change in
his book *The Mediterranean* by exemplifying the battle of Lepanto in 1571 which
ended Turkish dominance in the Mediterranean. Braudel likened this event to
“delusive smoke that does not last” and that it should not preoccupy historians
more than the bigger picture of the long duree. (Popkin 2016) From this model
Braudel is making a firm statement that by focusing only on the very surface of
this ocean of history we are missing the vast expanse of knowledge and reality
of the true scope of history. Although Braudel had used these three durees to
help illustrate his idea of historical time, he would later assert that these
were not the only durees, but rather there were many others. He emphasized the
concept of combining as many of these durees as possible in an effort to get
closer to the goal of *Total History*.

Followers of Braudel and his second wave of Annales School would come into their
own during the 1960s and expand upon his ideas. These scholars would focus of
the school in a new direction and take advantage of technological advances to
further research in the field of quantitative history. These historians
recognized the computer as a valuable tool to further the studies of statistics
on levels never before as efficient. They also took the innovative approach of
using public records, such as financial and population registries, as historical
sources that can be used to identify patterns. From this statistical data
analysis, the Annales historians hoped to be able to identify what they referred
to as *historical problems.*(Green and Troup 1999) This was a fundamental shift
away from the emphasis of total history of the previous Annales school eras.
Through these newly available methods and technologies Annales historians hoped
to be able to collaborate their research in a problem-solving approach to
history. Using computerized data Annales historians were able to identify causal
factors to historical changes and events and collaborate large groups of
scholars to tackle the problem. This was a huge shift in the mission of the
Annales School and history as a whole, creating an entirely new concept of what
the mission of a historian is.

In the 1970s the Annales School would see another major paradigm shift and the
dawning of a third distinctive era. In an effort to rehumanize the people it
studies, less emphasis was placed on the mere quantitative value of the research
and more was placed on the importance of the roles of individuals. Some had
begun to draw parallels of the heavy use of quantitative research and likened it
to the narrowmindedness of the positivist history the Annales had worked hard to
move away from. This new shift was characterized as the study of
*mentalites.*(Green and Troup 1999) The basis of this concept was to examine the
views and attitudes of everyday people on a range of topics such as sex, love,
religion, work, money, gender, and education to name a few. From the information
gained Annales historians hoped to be able to gain better context and insight to
the inner workings and dynamics of the societies in which these lay people
lived. Georges Duby studied primary sources such as art and architecture to
highlight how the changes in them in the medieval period were directly
correlated to the effects of urbanization and cultural expansion that occurred
during that period. He argued that as people’s attitudes to these changing
dynamics shifted, so too did the expressions of art and architecture of the
times.(Green and Troup 1999) While the methods and ideas of the Annales School
had evolved greatly from its beginnings during the 1970s, it still retained
elements of the previous eras and there remained Annales scholars who
revitalized and expanded on the ideas of Bloch, Febvre, and Braudel.

Although the influence and innovation of the Annales School is undebatable, they
have not been without their critics over the years. One of the most common of
these criticisms is the lack of a meta-narrative for historical change. (Green
and Troup 1999) The basis for this criticism is that while the Annales have been
well adapted to explaining and studying pre-industrial societies, they are less
suited to the more rapid and fast paced changes we see in modern society. There
also remains tensions within the school itself as to the direction and focus,
mentalities or quantification. The current state of the Annales School is not as
clearly defined as previous iterations, but during the 1990s onward it appears
that there is an ongoing shift that could result in yet another paradigm shift
and a fourth distinct era. **One thing that is clear however, is that the legacy
of the Annales School and the contributions they have made to the study of
history over the course of the twentieth century and into the current day have
been groundbreaking and revolutionary. They have laid the groundwork for new
generations to continue their work towards a Total History and to use the tools
and methods they mapped out to identify causes of historical problems and take
an active role in helping solve them.**

Green, Anna, and Kathleen Troup. 1999. *The Houses of History : A Critical
Reader in Twentieth-Century History and Theory*. New York : New York University
Press, 1999.

Ousselin, Edward. 2016. “La France En Chiffres: De 1870 à Nos Jours.” French
Studies 70 (2): 298.1-298. <https://doi.org/10.1093/fs/knw039>.

Wesseling, H. L. 1978. “The Annales School and the Writing of Contemporary
History.” Review (Fernand Braudel Center) 1 (3/4): 185–94.

Harsgor, Michael. 1978. “Total History: The Annales School.” Journal of
Contemporary History 13 (1): 1–13.

The French Historical Revolution: The Annales School, 1929–2014. By PETER BURKE.
Cambridge: Polity, 2015. xvi + 198 pp.

Popkin, Jeremy D. 2016. *From Herodotus to H-Net: The Story of Historiography*.
New York ; Oxford University Press.

FG: So far this is very clear and provides a nive overview. The areas I would focus improvement on: 1) MORE SPECIFICS--you mention, as you should, the broad changes that the Annales school attempted to bring about in their work--give some specific examples of or quotes from their works whenever possible. 2) LEGACY. You mention the influence was undebatable, but you haven't really made an argument as to exactly what that was. Can you give examples of how work followed their lead? Can you see describe how historiography went in different directions? Do people still directly follow them, or is their influence more indirect now? How did cultural events of the 20th century affect their influence/legacy? 
