My aim in this essay is to demonstrate how Anthropology has aided as well as influenced change in historiographical work over the centuries. Thus, this section will illustrate change in historiographical works over time and demonstrate how historiographic authority reformed along the development and emergence of anthropology. First, we need to understand Anthropology as its own discipline and second, how anthropology has influenced the methodological practice and perspective of the historian.

Summary: Anthropology, while being its own discipline, impacted historian's and their work.

Anthropology in its broadest definition is the study of the development of human societies and cultures. The aim of the anthropologist is to study human development through the analysis of biological evolution, communicative practices, social intergration, and acquisition of material culture. Prior to World War I, anthropology and the discipline of sociology were seen interchangeably. As historian and anthropologist Saurabh Dube surmises, "It followed that Time came to be increasingly mapped in hierarchical ways to plot peoples and cultues in the movement of history that was primarily projected as the passage of progress." (Dube, p. 7) Thus, the historians objective was to distinguish truth in the origin, development, and functionality of human society through a secularized historical process. However, the Enlightenment of the 17th and 18th centuries would transition the secularized views of history with those of scientific inquiry and critique. Herbert Spencer and Charles Darwin would be some of the first key figures of such thinking as both would formulate theories on the history of man and societial evolution with publications in the social sciences first with Spence's Social Statics and second Darwin's Origin of Species. These two books would instigate new worldviews and incite the union of history and anthropology.

Summary: Anthropology is the study in the development of human soceities and cultures. The Enlightenment would be the first appearance of Anthropology in History. Darwin and Spencer's works are some of the first publications that show the integration of Anthropology into historic writing.

After World War I historians began to develop new understandings of history by use of the discipline of Anthropology in conjunction with History. Previously, the two disciplines had been used interchangeably to understand Historical Sociology, a movement that gave rise to evolutionary models of human development which flourished under Karl Marx, Max Weber, and Emile Durkheim. Their theories focused on the growth of capitalism, political modernity, and the influence of social structures and systems on society. However, where their theories excelled, the lack of cultural understanding left a void for anthropologist to fill. As Green and Troup state in their book, The houses of History, Anthropology sought to, "redirect historians' attention away from the public, political sphere of human action towards private, daily life, by rediscovering old sources, including oral history and tradition." (Houses, p. 174) Thus, new methodological practices focused quantitative analysis by way of fieldwork, participant observation, and examination of material culture.

Summary: Following the conclusion of World War I, the use of history and Anthropology had given rise to a new model, the Historical Sociology. This new model would influence the writings and theories of Karl Marx and Emile Durkheim. However, those theories would not encompass the cultural understanding of the societies they studied, which was actually the aim of Anthropology.
Possible fix: In the first sentence, the ending phrase that follows "...understandings of history...", was a little awkward. It didn't seem to flow right.

The foundation for the Annales was established in 1929 by Marc Bloch and Lucien Febvre who attempted to institute a total-history which inspired new frameworks for historic time and structuralist theories. As Green and Troup infer, "Structuralists believe that we, as humans, make our world comprehensible by imposing mental structures upon it, consciously or unconsciously." (Houses, p.89) Hence, the development of all societies had an epistomelogical fabric that influenced the behaviour and development of said societies which inherently gave rise to civilization. This ideology advanced with English anthropologist, Sir Edward Burnett Tylor. Tylor knowns as, "The founder of academic anthropology" formulated the modern understanding of culture. Tylor reasoned on culture, "taken in its wide ethnographic sense is that complex whole which includes knowledge, belief, art, morals, law, custom and any other capabilities and habits aquired by man as a member of society." (Houses, p. 172) When considering anthropology's influence on history Tylor inferred, "The historian and the ethnographer must be called upon to show the hereditary standing of each opinion and practice, and their enquiry must go back as far as antiquity or savergery can show a vestige, for there seems no human thought so primitive as to have lost its bearing on our own thought, nor so ancient as to have broken its connexion with our own life." (p. 452) Thus, the practice of anthropology as a science in union with humanities, transended historic anthropology from a social phenomenon to cultural.

Summary: The foundation of the Annales in 1929 and Sir Edward Burnett Tylor shared the same idea for creating a total-history through the inclusion of cultural history in understanding a soceity. In order to understand how they had developed and behaved, one needed to study their art, morals, laws, customs, etc.

It would be under the controversial German anthropologist Franz Boas, "Father of American (cultural) Anthropology," who would expand on the development of culture based on his observations of indigenous Native American cultures. Boas states, "each people, each nation, each tribe had its fate, its irreplaceable character, and it was the task of the anthropologist, to document and defend it." (Eriksen p. 49) Thus, Boas encouraged data and theory to comprehend implications of culture and when applied to historiography Boas infers, "Though the anthropological point of view may thus pervade the treatment of an older branch of science and help to develop new standpoints, the assistance that anthropology renders, it does not destroy the independence of the older science which in a long history has developed its own aims and methods." (p.523) Nevertheless, it would not be until the end of World War II that an equilibrium between the social and cultural would be formulated into what is known as Functionalism.

Summary: Frank Boas completed his works on the development of the cultures from the indigenous Native American cultures. He wanted to explore and understand how culture could impicate the data and theory. 
Possible Fix: After the conclusion of your first quote, the context in between seemed a little vague. Why was it so important that he "encouraged data and theory to comprehend implication of culture"? 

The Functionalist approach to history suggested, "that all aspects of society were interrelated and therefore society should be studied as a whole." (Houses, p. 174) Under Bronisław Kasper Malinowski this theory would be introduced but advanced by Alfred Radcliffe-Brown and Sir Edward Evan Evans-Pritchard. Malinowski's thinking developed the anthropological practice of 'Participant Observation' which he concluded would give a "all around vision" of man and culture. Malinowski further professed, "The field ethnologist, who studies the various types of civilization under varied conditions, is the only sociologist who can, on a large scale, do anything comparable to an experiment in social matters. He can observe the differences in human mental constitution and human social behaviour under the various forms of physical and mental environment, as divergent as physical and mental nature will allow." (p. 82) Under Radcliffe-Brown and Evans-Pritchard methods of both historiography and social anthropology served as a descriptive integration which "seeks patterns rather than laws, and interprets rather than explains. Furthermore, history alone provides a satisfactory situation in which the hypotheses of functional anthropology can be tested." (p. 81) Thus, the indcution of "intrepretive archaeology" by Clifford Geertz would springboarding ideas regarding perspective and truth, subjectivity and objectivity, and moreover, notions of analogy to understand all cultures in society. For this reason, Geertz states, "the conjoining of History and Anthropology is not a matter of fusing two academic fields into a new Something-or-Other, but of redefining them in terms of one another by managing their relations within the bounds of a particular study: textual tactics. That sorting things into what moves and what moves it, what victimizes and what is victimized, or what happened and what we can say about what happened." (p. 329) Thus, by the middle of the 20th century the culmination of both disciplines, history and anthropology, consolidated into Ethnohistory.

Summary: In the middle of the 20th century, Ethnohistory embraced both history and anthropology within it. Many different thoughts and ideas surrounding this new subject wanted to understand behavior by understanding the environment around it, almost like a cause-and-effect action. It was aiming to interpret rather than to provide explanations.
This was a very strong paragraph, lots of supportive evidence and it was straight to the point!

Ethnohistory was defined by leading archaeologist and ethnologist W. C. Sturtevant as, "the study of the history of the peoples normally studied by anthropologist." (Houses, p.175) Hence the historian James Axtell formulates that, "Ethnohistory encompasses archaeology, ethnology, history and lingustics, and the source materials available to the enthnohistorian which include folklore, oral tradition, maps, paintings, and artefacts, as well as written sources" (Houses, p. 175)

Summary: Ethnohistory embodied history, archaeology, lingusitics, and enthology; including all of the oral, material, art, and written sources available to the individual.
Possible: Maybe add a little bit more context. How did this definition impact historiography?

FG: This is shaping up very nicely! This is MUCH more focused compared to the outline, and provides a very nice overview and great quotes. What hasn't emerged quite clearly enough is the relationship b/w anthropology and historiography. Can you point to more concrete cases or theorizing or practical examples where historians were deliberately using different methods, writing styles, etc, in historical work? I don't think you need to do anything more with describing anthropology--it's solid as is. So focus on the link to historiography, linking wherever possible to other class essays.

Louisa: I thought this was very well done. There wasn't much for me to really question or stumble over. It was clear, concise, and well supported. Though, there were a few things that I stated above. Good job!!
