## **Medieval Islamic Historiography**
### by Eden Vigil


Middle Eastern historiography is often not included in the traditional historiographical narrative. As we have read, there have been numerous European historiographers, and this section hopes to include a medieval Middle Eastern perspective. I am going to focus on **three** historians and their methods of writing history: al-Ṭabarī, ibn al-Athīr, and ibn Khaldūn from the 10th-14th century of the ~~Common Era~~. These three Islamic historians are often **overlooked and unrepresented** in the historiographical narrative, yet they all offered unique contributions to the way medieval Middle Eastern history is understood today. These historians' works were both foundational and exceptional within the writing of history.

Middle Eastern history has been primarily Islamic, rooted in faith, and often begins with the Islamic creation of Adam. From the advent of Islam, or the golden ages of Islam after the 7th century, history was told orally, like a story. As such, it included stories within the narrative which were "used to help the listener [or] reader frame the historical narrative that he or she was about to hear [or] read" (Keshk 2009, p. 382). It helps "frame" the narrative which is done in three different ways. The first requires familiarity; "the...story follow[s] a certain pattern than the listener/reader is familiar with." The second way "is to use the set-up story as a moral micro-narrative of what is about to occur." It then acts like a frame for the narrative. Finally, the third way to "set-up" the story is as a lead-in; "that is, the narrator would like the listener/reader to understand the protocols of certain actions" (Keshk 2009, p. 382). These frameworks for Islamic history, specifically, posed as a way to illuminate the aspects unique to it.  This work poses as an answer to the deficiency of an Islamic historiographical perspective.

The three authors in the focus of this work are three historiographical founders and replicators of a Greco-Islamic approach and narrative of causation. In their three different works, they each attempt to answer the question of historical consequence. ~~Their historical inertia cannot be grounded, their necessity cannot be removed.~~ Each historian had a large framework in which they worked, and *without their views of Islamic history, the narrative of the Middle East would be deficient and barren.* ~~I am arguing for these author's individuality and historical impetus within the narrative of Islamic history.~~ They cannot be removed from their timeline, but with the superpower of historical hindsight, their importance to our understanding of historiography cannot be removed.

The first Islamic historian that will be examined today is Abū Jaʿfar Muḥammad ibn Jarīr al-Ṭabarī (839-923 C.E.). He was a Persian Islamic scholar. His major historical work *The History of Prophets and Kings* was the first Islamic historical work of its kind (Osman 2001, p. 66). al-Ṭabarī utilized different sources in his recounting of history, he included "a basic chronological framework and an outline of the main events... that were matters of widespread and generally accepted knowledge" (Osman 2001, p. 67). In other words, it was similar to a chronicle, with the date and the daily happenings included. The style al-Ṭabarī wrote has been described as "*the khabar-form*" of writing history.
`Great paragraph!`

*Khabar* or the plural *akhbar* often is translated as modern-day news or happenings, but in this case it means individual reports (Mårtensson 2005, p. 291). This term describes the histories written from "the eightth to the ninth centuries C.E." that is written *as a narrative* that has been "pieced together by individual reports about historical events, transmitted by *isnads*, or the chains of authorities..." (p. 291). Within this narrative, the information ~~he~~ was received by the *isnads* is then presented, given variants to them, then evaluated with "his main criteria of evaluation being soundness of the *isnad*, and reference to God and His Messenger" (p. 292). `Consider revising previous sentence.` *This theme of an authority transmitting the historical narrative has been seen time and time again throughout the textbook; this is not the last time it will be mentioned either.*

Within his transmission of the information from the *isnads*, al-Ṭabarī often "interjects and inserts general information that was presumably circulating at the time, sometimes introducing it with the words, ~~"~~*qala Abu Gafar*,~~"~~  thus creating ~~"~~ 'a basic chronological framework and an outline of the main events... that were matters of widespread and generally accepted knowledge.~~"~~"' (Osman 2001, p. 67). However, al-Ṭabarī has also been accused of manipulating the sources in order to fit his narrative. This is not unique to this historian; many medieval scholars did this with documents of antiquity to fit a religious narrative (Popkin 2016, p. 39). This was a consequence of a lack of peer-review. For example, "al-Ṭabarī added material to his sources to develop the characters of his heroes and villains. In others, he omitted details to render characters who were not central to his theme more opaque." (Judd 2005, p. 210). al-Ṭabarī also "recorded...different versions that sometimes confirmed and sometimes contradicted each other" (Gabrieli 1979, p. 86). The utilization of  ~~"~~*the khabar-form*~~"~~ to create a thematic narrative to explain events was not limited to just al-Ṭabarī. His historical successors also utilized narrative, and his legacy lived on through ibn al-Athīr.

Historian during the 12th and 13th centuries and chronicler of counter-crusader Salah ad-Din, ʿIzz al-Dīn Abū al-ḤasanʿAlī ibn al-Athīr wrote an entire world history called *Al-Kamil fi al-Tarikh* or *The Complete History*. This history also began with the Islamic creation of Adam to time contemporary for the author, ibn al-Athīr. ~~Born in Mosul in May 1160, ibn al-Athīr was in the city when Salah ad-Din besieged the town in 1185 (Mallett 2012, p. 243).~~ His methods included the application of a title and placing events in chronological order (Kamaruzaman et. al 2015, p. 32). While this was not unique to ibn al-Athīr, it helped the work remain organized. The way he wrote was unique to him but his contribution continued a unique genre of "*complete*" historical writing.

Ibn al-Athīr's work in *The Complete History* includes an introduction, or *muqaddimah* in Arabic. This introduction includes "his philosophy of history for collective understanding of the readers" (Kamaruzaman et. al 2015, p. 29). His work was not purely a "historical" artifact but instead served multiple purposes; his history was intended to be a reminder to mankind, or *tazkirah*. (Kamaruzaman et. al 2015, p. 32). His work was both universal and contemporary, because it focused on both important Islamic events and minor events (non-Islamic); yet, he did borrow from historians before him and stated "the source of al-Kamil was the work of history by Abu Ja‘afar al-Tabari namely the book Tarikh al-Rusul wa al-Muluk" (or *History of Prophets and Kings*) (Kamaruzaman et. al 2015, p. 31). His historical analysis has been vital to the understanding of the Crusades. While his work was revolved around the Crusades and the European Crusaders, the history he wrote was not limited to just his personal experience; he "did not limit his attention to events that involved them; he had wider horizons [and included] North African history...as well as accounts of events in Central Asia and Iran" (Hillenbrand 2008, p. 712). There truly are not enough articles about al-Athīr and very few translations of the work *The Complete History* and while his methods were questionable, his contributions to the writing of history cannot be downplayed.

In his writing of this complete work of history, he directly opposed the way in which other Islamic historians of his time (and before him) wrote. For example, Islamic historians did not focus on an area beyond their geographical location and many historians did not "extend to record events in other areas" (Kamaruzaman et. al 2015, p. 30). However, it is not to say he did not have his faults. He ~~often~~ "frequently suppresses elements of the original narrative, and occasionally uses the rest to support a false interpretation" (Gibb 1935, p. 746). While his work was revolutionary at the time because of the scope, it still cannot be taken at face-value as the "sole authority" (Gibb 1935, p. 751). This is important to remember for *all* works of history; thus, *the purpose of historiography*.

Abū Zayd 'Abd ar-Raḥmān ibn Muḥammad ibn Khaldūn al-Ḥaḍramī (or better known as ibn Khaldūn) was born in 1332 C.E. in Tunisia. His work the *The Muqaddimah* which is the first volume, and introduction to, his world history "*the Kitab al-'lbar*" or *Book of Historical Examples* (Gabrieli 1979, p. 93). He was trained in philosophy and often wrote "some summaries of the works of great Muslim philosophers", but never called himself a philosopher (Çasku 2017, p. 27). In fact, Ibn Khauldun "did not only criticize philosophy but also refuted it and condemned those who taught the subject" (Ahmad 2017, p. 58). He was never in the "circle" of Muslim philosophy, nor was *The  Muqaddima* a strictly philosophical introduction to history; however, his introduction holds both Greek and Annaliste styles of writing (Ahmad, 2017 p. 57, 58). *The Muqaddima* is "a general review of the arts, science, and industry of Islamic civilization" which is the predecessor to the history of the people "with ethical and cultural stratification" (Gabrieli, p. 93). Within *The Muqaddima*, ibn Khaldūn creates the concept of *'aṣabiyyah* in comparison to civilization.

His main theme within *The Muqaddima* is the concept of *'aṣabiyyah* or group feeling; civilization, however, "is the matter of the state, and equally the state provides matter for civilization" which is the **potential** *material cause of history* (Çasku 2017, p. 34). ‘Aṣabiyyah is the "family or group feeling, whose intensity varies with environment." (Dale 2006, p. 438). It replaces one's "destructive tribal and kinship ties" (White 2009, p. 236). However, just as relationships end or family members pass away, ‘aṣabiyyah naturally has an end. Like the end of dynasty, the civilization passes away as well. It seems this change is done without human agency because "[the] kingship arises because of the "*necessity of existence*, [or] *darufra al-wujud*"; so just as civilizations form with ‘aṣabiyyah, kingships form because of "the necessity [their] existence" (Dale 2006, p. 438). The theory of "causation" or historical causality is present within his works, utilizing rationality and logic. This is why he has been called the last Greek and first Annaliste Historian.

He has been called "the last Greek and the first Annaliste Historian" because of this large introduction, in which he "used the...assumptions of this rationalist tradition" (Dale 2006, p. 431). The way in which this was implemented within *The Muqaddimah* was by Khaldūn simply stating that "history is--or should be--rooted in wisdom or philosophy" and that the past must be analyzed, rather than reported. This was to be done "rationally... using Greco-Islamic logical methodologies." (Dale 2006, p. 433). The introduction alone contains his "philosophic ideas, with regareds to human society, history and civilization", so it has been recognized as Ibn Khaldūn's "thoughts on philosophy of history, historiography and sociology" (Ahmad 2017, p. 58). As stated earlier, the philosophy of history is deeply embedded in civilization, and therefore ‘aṣabiyyah is deeply embedded within Khaldūn's philosophy.

These three Islamic historians were huge testaments of their time and their environment. Remarkably, their works have lasted to this day. The historical significance of their works are not limited to just the frames in which they worked, but the way they were written. al-Ṭabarī's manipulation of his sources to fit the particular narrative he wanted to tell is a neverceasing fact within the history of writing history. This was not a new phenomena; what is new is the utilization of a thematic narrative in which *all three* of these authors encompass. This is the brilliance of their contributions to Middle Eastern history; the historical works of al-Ṭabarī and ibn al-Athīr both formed a narrative approach to Islamic history. The rationality behind ibn Khaldūn's understanding of These frames created by the three authors here remain an example and even a reminder (tazkirah) to learn from in our future historical endeavors.

'Great use of bolding and Italics!'

**Works Cited**

Ahmad, Z. (2017). *A 14th Century Critique of Greek Philosophy: The Case of Ibn Khaldun*. Journal of Historical Sociology, 30(1), 57–66.

Çaksu, A. (2017). *Ibn Khaldun and Philosophy: Causality in History.* Journal of Historical Sociology, 30(1), 27–42.

Dale, S. F. (2006). *Ibn Khaldun: The Last Greek and the First Annaliste Historian.* International Journal of Middle East Studies, 38(3), 431-451.

Gabrieli, F. (1979). *Arabic Historiography.* Islamic Studies, 18(2), 81–95.

Gibb, H. A. R. (1935). *Notes on the Arabic Materials for the History of the Early Crusades.* Bulletin of the School of Oriental Studies, University of London, 7.

Hillenbrand, C. (2008). *Reviewed Work(s): The Chronicle of Ibn al-Athīr for the Crusading Period from “Al-Kāmil fiʾl-taʾrīkh*,” Part 1: The Years 491-541/1097-1146: The Coming of the Franks and the Muslim Response by Ibn al-Athīr and D. S. Richards. Speculum, 83(3), 712–713.

Judd, S. C. (2005). *Narratives And Character Development: Al-Tabarì And Al-Balàdhurì On Late Umayyad History* (p. 18).

Kamaruzaman, A. F., Jamaludin, N., & Faathin Mohd Fadzil, A. (2015). *Ibn Al-Athir’s Philosophy of History in Al-Kamil Fi Al-Tarikh*. Asian Social Science, 11(23).

Keshk, K. (2009). *How to Frame History*, 381–399.

Mallett, A. (2012). *Islamic Historians of the Ayyūbid Era and Muslim Rulers from the Early Crusading Period: A Study in the Use of History*. Al-Masāq, 24(3), 241–252.

Mårtensson, U. (2005). *Discourse and Historical Analysis: The Case of al-Ṭabarī’s History of the Messengers and the Kings*. Journal of Islamic Studies, 16(3), 287–331.

Osman, G. (2001). *Oral vs. Written Transmission: The Case of Ṭabarī and Ibn Saʿd*, 66–80.

White, A. (2009). *Islamic Approach to Studying History*, 17(2), 25. 
