Elena Farmin

**The Intellectual Status of History**

In his 1891 essay “The Significance of History,” Frederick Jackson Turner wrote “[t]he conceptions of history have been almost as numerous as the men who have written history” (Stern 1956, 198). **Individual historians and different schools of thought** `both` **have their own views on the proper methods and purpose of history,** as `a result of` ~~did~~ the time periods ~~during which~~ `when`their ideals were formed.** `History,` ~~Being~~ a field of study that has existed for thousands of years, ~~history~~ has evolved not just in terms of how it is conducted`,` but also in its intellectual status. **Intellectual status** in this context **refers to how history has been categorized with regards to other branches of knowledge.** Prior to the nineteenth century, history was a well-studied subject`,` but not an academic discipline in its own right; after professionalization `[define]`, history continued to experience massive paradigm shifts that determined the subject’s relevance not just in academia but in society.

`The intellectual status of history is directly related to other fields of study, and shifts a lot depending on the ideals of the time period.`

The Ancient Greek historian Herodotus owes his moniker of *"the father of history"* to the ***proto-history* of ancient Egyptian and Babylonia record keepers**. `[explain? all you really need is to tell me what the proto-history is. A recording of events? Lists of facts?]` Herodotus praised the Egyptians in *Histories* for “~~by~~ their practice of keeping records of the past~~,~~ `...`[they] have made themselves much`[?]` the most learned of any nation of which I have had experience” (Burrow 2007, 3). In that same work, Herodotus states that his purpose in writing was “so that human achievements may not become forgotten in time, and great and [marvelous] deeds … may not be without their glory …” (Burrow 2007, 13). **Like Herodotus before him, Thucydides saw his work as a means of preserving memory of the past** without the fantastical elements of poetic narratives, ~~notably~~ `such as` the gods and monsters seen in the epics of Homer~~.~~ (Popkin 2016, 27). ~~In other words,~~ ~~t~~`T`hese two emblems of Ancient Greek historiography made narrative pasts more grounded and human. `[there needs to be a bride here between the men and the definition of history. It's a very sudden subject change]`**The name history comes from *historia*, the Ancient Greek word for “inquiry”** (Burrow 2007, xiii). **_(insert: how this determined Ancient Greek views on the subject)_** `[don't forget this]` In the Roman world`,` about a century later, **the likes of Polybius, Livy, and Tacitus, would continue this tradition ~~but~~ with a wider scope.** ~~Focusing on past events that occurred beyond the confines of a city or city-state,~~ Ancient Roman historians developed what is know today as a national history `by focusing on past events that occurred beyond the confines of a city or city-state` (Popkin 2016, 31-32). **While the writings of these scholars are now seen as the beginning of a particular field`[? what field?]`, the writers themselves just`[? justify?]` their work as a continuation of the philosophical tradition of preserving the past.**

`There are a couple important figures that contributed to the birth of history, history is defined, national history started.`  

**With a new world religion came another intellectual innovation.** By the fourth century, the Roman Empire had ~~been~~ Christianized, along with the “barbarian” `[take a moment to define who you mean. I assume the Goths?]` peoples in the centuries to follow. While the scholars of the former Roman and Hellenistic Worlds viewed historical writings as the continuation of a philosophical tradition, **medieval Christian historians used their works to promote a theological tradition.** Medieval Christian historiography propagated the theological idea of God’s divine plan, ~~that~~ `where/in which` all events in human history were leading up to some great event (Popkin 2016, 36-39). **Another major characteristic of Western medieval historical writing was the shift from narrative `writing` to `the writing of` chronicles and annals.** ~~That is ~~ ~~n~~ `N`ot ~~to say that~~ all writings were done in that style, but ~~it~~ `the shift` was a sign of the loss of ancient knowledge and unity as a result of the “disintegration of the western Roman Empire” (Popkin 2016, 39-41). **_(insert: how Christianized knowledge of the past helped to reinforce ideas about morality and theology)_** [`don't forget this either]`

`Christianity changed the writing of history, then the shift into the Medieval Era changed it more.`

**More shifts ~~were to come~~ `came` in the early modern era~~,~~ `:` two periods that are known today as the Renaissance and the Enlightenment ~~respectively~~.** The new historical traditions developed during the fifteenth, sixteenth, seventeenth, and eighteenth centuries came about due to **“the secularization of thought, the growth of science, and the questioning of all systems embodying eternal truths”** (Stern 1956, 12). **Renaissance historiography held the Ancient World in ~~such~~ high regard,** as can be seen in “the emergence of a republican form of internal politics and the political fragmentation of Italy into a number of mutually suspicious and hostile states” (Burrow 2007, 259-260). In other words, Italy return~~ing~~`ed` to the city-state system of centuries prior`, [expand a little on this, restate the quoted observations]`. The reverence for the Ancient World can also be seen in “the revival of classical learning known as humanism, which from the fifteenth century onward incorporated a close attention to the manner as well as the content of exemplary Roman historians~~, particularly Livy~~” (Burrow 2007, 260). **The invention of the printing press by Johannes Gutenberg c. 1460 `also` allowed for increased ~~“~~access to historical knowledge,~~”~~ `[paraphrasing here is okay]`which had previously been available to only the elite and the clergy** (Popkin 2016, 53-54). `[Adda bridge. Maybe, "this lead to/was the "popularization" of history.]` ~~Not to mention~~`For example,` the first instance of the popularization of history that is most evident in the historical plays`,` ~~(~~or simply`, "`the histories`,"` as theatre fans and scholars alike refer to them`,` ~~)~~ of William Shakespeare (Popkin 2016, 55). **Enlightenment historiography, on the other hand, welcomed the possibilities of the future.** `[did the other not?]` In the century that witnessed the American and French Revolutions, the leading scholars of the day`, such as` ~~like~~ Voltaire “[rebelled] against the prevailing ideals and forms of historiography” in favor of a “secular and naturalistic history which would depict the life and spirit of peoples, their art, science and politics” (Stern 1956, 35). **Enlightenment historians still wrote about the Ancient World`,` but~~,~~ in the spirit of revolution, their accounts were more critical of the time `than [previous styles]`**`.` `This` ~~as~~ can be seen in the works of Barthold Goerg Niebuhr (Stern 1956, 46-47) and Edward Gibbon (Popkin 2016, 63-65). **`Despite` ~~With~~ all these new developments~~, history~~ by the end of the eighteenth century`, history` was still a line of work more in the vein of philosophy.** 

`Professionalization changed with Renaissance and the Enlightenment, the way history was viewed/written also changed.` 

Then ~~along~~ came a German historian by the name of Leopold von Ranke `[place in historical context here instead of the next sentence. It'll improve your flow.]`. **While working as a professor at the University of Berlin ~~for much of the nineteenth century~~, Ranke not only developed a more scientific approach to the study of history`,` but contributed to its professionalization `by... [very brief descriptionto set the paragragh up]`.** The Rankean method involved reconstructing past events from historical documents (what we would now call primary sources) and critically assessing said sources. This was a great contrast to the work of G.W.F. Hegel, a German philosopher who took a more speculative approach to understanding history (Popkin 2016, 75-77). History students attending universities were previously taught solely through lectures~~;~~ `,but` Ranke developed the research seminar, which allowed for students to both learn a historical narrative and come to their own conclusions on the narrative through engagement ~~with,~~ and critical examination of~~,~~ sources (Popkin 2016, 77-78). While Ranke held that historians should be critical of their sources, he rejected moralizing `historical narratives` since ~~that~~ `he felt it` defeated the purpose of the “historian’s objectivity” (Gil 2009, 384). Unlike the historians of ~~the previous era (~~the Enlightenment~~)~~, Ranke did not believe that history should be judged by according to contemporary principles, nor should it be shaped “into a story with a moral lesson for the present”~~;~~`.` ~~r~~`R`ather, historians should strive to “show what actually happened” (Popkin 2016, 76). Once history had become professionalized and `became` a discipline in its own right, the work of professional historians was then judged by a community of other professional historians`.`~~,~~ `One` such `group` ~~as~~ `is` the American Historical Association`, which critiqued historical writings` ~~(~~as opposed to the public`,` or whoever was the ruler at the time~~)~~ (Popkin 2016, 78-79). **While professional history owes much to Ranke and his methods, ~~they were~~ `the developments were` not without their `own` downsides and critics.** **_(insert: nationalist history in German leading up to the ideals of Nazism)_** `[don't forget this either, or to bridge into your next thought]` Friedrich Neitzsche’s 1874 essay “Use and Disadvantage of History” detailed his belief that “historical thinking [of the time] had overpowered the creative, spontaneous forces of life, and that historians had succumbed to a lifeless scientism … [demanding] that the historian needs moral courage and intellectual involvement as well as erudition” (Stern 1956, 20).`[explain this quote. It's a bit lengthy and wordy. It's good, but not the easiest to tell what you mean by it/how it supports your argument]` In spite of this, **Ranke`'s methods` ~~made it  so that~~ `established that` historians were engaging in their own field of study, not just some academic pursuit that was a conglomerate of philosophical and literary traditions.**

`Ranke is super important, established history as it's own discipline. Big shift from Enlightenmetn ideas.`

**The twentieth and twenty-first centuries saw enough paradigm shifts to make professionals and the public re-evaluate historical traditions of the last few centuries.** **_(insert: various movements for civil rights causes led to a greater demand for the narratives of people who are not just white, male, heterosexual, western, etc.) (new schools of thought: the Annales school, Marxism, post-colonialism, postmodernism, etc.)_** `[Don't forget to do this either]` The Annales school provided a ~~“middle ground between a philosophy of history which accepts and one which rejects all generalizations and insists that the unique individuality of every historical constellation be understood immediately on its own terms without reference to general concepts”~~ `[Paraphrase this quote and mold it into a statement of what you're trying to say. USe multiple sentences- it's just a little too long and clunky.]` (Iggers 1984, 44). **_(Popularization of history: historical knowledge became even more readily available to the general public through museums, libraries, national archives, film, popular books, and television documentaries.)_** `[definitely don't forget to do this too.]` **History was no longer a pursuit of scholars`,` but something that ordinary people could engage in, whether through debate or study.** `[I love this concluding sentence.]`

`there's more examples that are supposed to be here, which prove that history has moved away from professionalization back to casual use again.`

**History itself has had quite an interesting history in terms of how scholars and society have viewed it …** `[don't forget to finish your conclusion.]`

FG: your introduction does a pretty good job of stating you're going to explore intellectual status of history, but i'm not sure your essay really follows through with is. what you certainly do have, though, is an excellent overview of historiographical change. as you revise, constantly relate these changes to the intellectual status of history. as you conclude the essay with ideas about populatization, that's another opportunity to discuss whether popularization reduces the status of it, since it's clearly not the domain of the proper historian anymore. also, remember that a lot of the question about intellectual status also relates to questions of historical authority and how it is established. that theme could be more explicitly developed and add an important level of depth to your essay.

**Bibliography**

Burrow, John. 2007. *A History of Histories*. New York: Alfred A. Knopf.

Gil, Thomas. 2009. “Leopold Ranke.” In *A Companion to the Philosophy of History and Historiography*, 383-392. Hoboken: Wiley Blackwell.

Green, Anna and Troup, Kathleen (eds.). 1999. *The Houses of History: A Critical Reader in Twentieth-Century History and Theory*. New York: New York University Press.

Iggers, Georg G. 1984. *New Directions in European Historiography*. Middletown: Wesleyan University Press. 

Popkin, Jeremy D. 2016. *From Herodotus to H-Net: The Story of Historiography*. New York: Oxford University Press. 

Stern, Fritz. 1956. *The Varieties of History: From Voltaire to the Present*. Cleveland: The World Publishing Company. 
