## Early Feminist History
~~After World War II, a phenomenon developed called postmodernism, which would soon sweep through the field of historiography. Postmodernism rejected most of the changes to historiography that had come about with the Enlightenment, a move away from the Rankean traditions of the first half of~~ the 20th century (I'd start with in an introduction in 20th) ~~With this rejection~~, avenues that had been previously closed now had the ability to make their debut. ~~Along with other histories, including previously colonized people groups~~, women’s history would emerge alongside second wave feminism`,` ~~While women’s history would arise~~ increaseing because of women questioning why their story had been left out of the narrative, it would grow to become an all-encompassing social movement that would look at the larger social relations between men and women. ~~With this change would come a historiography revolution within historiography~~. **Women were “trapped in a present where oppressive social relations appear natural and inevitable. Knowledge of history is knowledge that things have changed and do change” (Green and Troup, pg. 253). Using the groundwork laid by postmodernism, second-wave feminism would fundamentally transformation historiography through bringing to light the many male-centric ways that the world was classified through, `and` ~~as well as~~ questioning the traditional ways of thinking about the world.**

+`why were women not traditionally included in the narrative? how was this attributed to the Enlightenment and Rankean traditions? what did first wave feminism contribute?`
 
* We already really took apart you're opening in class so I'd really like to leave you alone on this one. I'd generally parrot the Prof's critisisms about to much intial exsposition before the thesis. I'd possible suggest you shorten up the history of feminist histories and focus on why it's an important and unique development past just postmodernism and postcolonialism. 

Feminist historians would seek out a larger change to the institutions that perpetuated an unchanging view of women in history: ~~*historiography*~~ (?). Throughout much of history, women were pushed to the back burner of the narrative. ~~In an increasingly postmodernist fashion,~~ `With the rise of feminist authors` historians began to question the relationship of women `in` history. Simone de Beauvoir, one of the most influential feminist during the early postmodern period, wrote *The Second Sex*, a novel on the treatment of women, and one of the first pieces of literature that addresses the sex and gender distinction. The difference between biological sex and socially constructed gender is what would drive much of second-wave feminism. ~~In Simone de Beauvoir’s groundbreaking essay, *The Second Sex*~~, she states that “[h]umanity is male, and man defines woman, not in herself, but in relation to himself” (De Beauvoir, pg. 26). Beauvoir was bringing the actual problem to the forefront. Instead of attacking the lack of female perspectives within society, she was questioning the fact that a woman’s *entire* existence was based upon the men who surrounded her. ~This groundbreaking analysis allowed the system itself, and the positionality of history as a whole.  `were postmodernists the only ones concerned with this issue?`


* Good introduction to theoretical development of Feminist history. It's overall solid in terms of explanation, there was some repetiveness that I knocked out. 


~~Similarly, within historiography~~ `Feminist` historians began to question ~~the fact~~ `the` ~~all~~ histories written about women ~~were~~ `because of the perspective bias of their male authors`. The male historians`'` bias and lack of knowledge surrounding women were bound to come through, `harming womens development, their bias allowed society to` ~~which would~~ perpetuate the dominant, `negative views` of women. While historiography had continued to `evolve` ~~grow and change~~, the fundamental ~thing~ `aspect` that ~~stayed the same~~ `never developed` was the way that the male dominant society would perpetuate their own view of women. Without questioning their positionality, historians wrote about the role of women in society as a fixed entity, never seeing their view of women as anything other than the truth~~. Up~~ until second-wave feminism`.` **`The` categorization of history was generally made up of areas traditionally controlled by males. The lack of histories written by ~~females~~ `women` made it incredibly difficult to change the` their status` ~~of women~~ throughout history,** ~~as it was only being looked at through a male lens.~~ Because of the revolutionary work done by De Beauvoir, and many other ~~early~~ second-wave feminists like her, the underlying institutions were being questioned, and actual change was beginning to occur within the field of historiography. ~~This was one of the ways that second-wave feminists would go about changing the traditional view of women, within historiography, and within society as a whole.~~ 

* Generally good message on the evolving viewpoints of women in history, sorry I went overboard on the edits here. The topic is good but some of was a bit reduntant or out of place so I fit it to my own overboard writing. The intro didn't flow to well into the topic of the paragraph (for me at least), I tend to like using more impactful statements to transistion into the topic. Also the last sentence was really just recap so I say flush it. 

~~When looking at the periodization of history, and as such, the changes in historiography over time, most periodization conformed to the male dominated view of history .Looking at history through this lens is what continually reinforced the traditional view of women.~~ **Feminist historians destroyed the notion that there was a natural place for women within the world.** This was not a view that historians actively tried to perpetuate, *`but` rather a concept that previous historians had conformed to.* ~~and now was very difficult to get away from.~~ Historians themselves “could not lay claim to special knowledge about the ‘natural” roles and relation of the sexes, but they knew what that order was, or ought to be. History simply tended to confirm it,” (Kelly, pg. 7). This was one of the fundamental ways that the female historians would go on to change historiography. Recognizing that most categories within history were created for and by men, women could then go forward and illustrate that the gender roles that had seemed so “natural” to histories were actually “a social and not a natural one. This perception forms the core idea that upsets traditional thinking,” (Kelly, pg. 1). When the traditional periodization of history was questioned, it left the doors open for other marginalized groups to have their time in the spotlight. Joan Kelly’s famous text, *Did Women Have a Renaissance*, would be one of the first examples of women questioning the status quo, and expressing their discontent with it. ~~This would be one of the major turning points for historiography as a whole.~~ `how much did this turning point change some of the Rankean traditions in the field of Historiography? what has remaioned unchanged?`

* ^This is good shit right here^ and if you used just one spefic example of how women were able to go in and argue how gender is constructed by societies expectation it would seal the deal on this hella sweet paragraph. 

**The relationships between the sexes, as well as the relationships between the majority and the minority, would be forever changed because of feminist historian’s push into postmodernism.** *Postmodern historiography would begin to question the traditional categories of analysis that had been created by the historiographic revolution during the Enlightenment.* Questioning the positionality of those who created the categories, as well as the periodization of history, would leave the pathway open for other ~~people~~ groups to be included in the narrative. Joan Kelly ~~was a prominent female historian, who~~ would go on to change the field of historiography through revolutionizing ~~the periodization of~~ `feminist` history. One of Kelly’s seminal theories was that surrounding a female renaissance. Kelly stated that the major moments in history for men were not necessarily the same for women, sometimes *“events that further the historical development of men, liberating them from natural, social, or ideological constraints, have quite different, even opposite, effects upon women,”* (Kelly, pg. 19). This is one of the flaws with a male centered history, and something that feminist historians tried to change within historiography. Through their striving they were able to push the narrative off center and open the floodgates for other marginalized groups in society.

 * Another fantastique paragraph but you don't have to qualify Joan Kelly as prominant becuase you've recognized that she has a famous text, and that quote was bomb so I believed you. In the closing sentences I would say you could expand the idea of the flaw; that its reall a fatal flaw in male centered perspective as it ignores literally one half of the populations perspective. As a man I can never really get that side of humanity how can I learn without it you know? Thats what the omission of female perspective does and I think is a lot of room for that. Also it would be a good way to tie back into the relationship between the sex's Otherwise it's solid and explanitory towards the ideas of how women are still experiencing cultural development and exploring what the consequences of what not having representation has done. 

~~Over the course of the 20th century,~~ feminist historians continually pressed for a paradigm shift within the field ~~of historiography. Postmodernism, during which the term paradigm shift was invented, was a drastic change from the modernist historians of the past.~~ When second-wave feminism began to infiltrate higher learning institutions, they were able to create the lasting change that they had desired from the start. While this was a huge step, Beauvoir pointed out that, “woman has always been, if not man’s slave, at least his vassal; the two sexes have never divided the world up equally; and still today, even though her condition is changing, woman is heavily handicapped” (Beauvoir, pg. 29). This was true not only in the everyday world, but also within academia. Female historians, while becoming ~~more and~~ more common in the profession, would not be able to feel the full effect of the slow changes within society until many years later. `(This sentence is a bit wordy)` This was also an incredibly hard task, because “in seeking to add women to the fund of historical knowledge, women’s history has revitalized theory, for it has shaken the conceptual foundations of historical study.” (Kelly, pg. 1). Frankly, it was an uphill battle, fighting against ingrained societal norms, which became even more difficult because “of the social consequences of sex category membership: the allocation of power and resources not only in the domestic, economic, and political domains but also in the broad arena of interpersonal relations,” (West and Fenstermaker, pg. 390). Women infiltrating into the world of academia was a huge step towards the paradigm shift within society that second-wave feminists were fighting for, and they were able to use the institutional power that they had gained to help mold the change they were seeking in other areas.

* This is good the middle sentence I commented around could be reworded but I won't lie I'm a bit too tired to give accurate feedback on how. 

~~Much of~~ society was working against the early second-wave feminists, and change was not instantaneous. Questioning the traditional ways of thinking was met with ~~some~~ resistance, and it was even more difficult because many of the historical artifacts ~~looked at ~~were enforcing the same agenda about women. This also was increasingly difficult because there ~~is not as much~~ `was a lack of` historical evidence surrounding women as there is needed to create a full historical text about women in any age. ~~Throughout history,
~~ women ~~would~~ `experienced vastly` different relations to power, but they would never `gain the momentum` to equal~~s to~~ men. ~~While~~ during the middle ages, women had `garnered` some agency within the `"feudal"` system, there was “no counterpart in [the] Renaissance” (Kelly, pg. 31). As the ability to hold power slipped away ~~after the middle ages~~, so did the small grasp that women had had within historiography. ~~Not until~~ much later, after postmodernists had ravaged much of history `(lmao)` before it, ~~would~~ feminist historians have the space to say their piece. ~~Early second-wave feminists would lead the way to break the norms within historiography, giving way to a more decentralized narrative, and the ever present question of one’s positionality and inherent bias.~~ These changes have taken time to come about and “[t]he extraordinary range and variety of early modern women’s cultural agency and creativity have come into focus in ways that Kelly could hardly have imagined,” (Coletti, pg. 249). Coletti, reviewing Kelly’s work almost fifty years later, is one of the examples of the sweeping change that would take hold of historiography. Coletti’s critique of second-wave feminists was only possible because of the work done by early feminists like Kelly. The effects of second-wave feminism within history would take decades to solidify and only then would it create the change they wanted to see.
`how much do fmeninist historians account for their own bias? are they as critical of perceived agendas within their own theories? what are some of the criticisms that have been leveled towards them?`

* Dr. Davis-Secord rant about localization, impoverization, and ruralization; feudalism is a lie, etc... Explain the small grasp within historiography during middle ages, maybe a little repetive here towards the end about deconstructing categories it has been discussed. 

Feminist historians would contribute a *significant* amount to the push towards postmodernism. **By exposing the problematic ways in which historiography had been previously practiced, as well as fundamentally shifting away from the singular perspective of the white male, historiography was pushed into a new era.** These changes were monumental, and pushed for other groups to finally be included in the grand narrative, *but* second-wave feminism had its problems. While this was the first step towards a more all-inclusive history, there was almost no mention of women of color. White, middle-class, women led the charge, but they seemed to only take their issues into account. In the later 1980’s, this would profoundly change with the development of third-wave feminism. Women of color, of different socio-economic backgrounds, and of differing identities would begin to push for another change in historiography, creating an entirely new tidal wave of change.

During the early development of postmodernism, second-wave feminism would take hold of society. Not only would second-wave feminism change the way that society viewed women of the present, but also how the viewed female agency of the past. Second-wave feminism would fundamentally transform historiography by forcing historians to break free from traditional ways of thinking. Along with this, it would also bring to light the singular male lens that society had been viewed through. Both of these changes would lead to historians to continually question their positionality, as well as historiography opening its doors to new and different perspectives, both of which were a much needed breathe of fresh air in the realm of historiography.
 `have no useful parts of past historiographic approaches persisted? have there been any merging of ideas and concepts?`
 
* Overall it's a *quailty essay with content abound*. I'm very sorry about what I did to it with edits, things got...out of hand...so um, things to work on; look out for repetition on the idea of deconstructing categories that excluded women, I agree this is uber important but it can still be repetitive. There is a couple of points where you can expand as they tend to be vague allusions to larger topics that could be interesting to read about like womens involvement in historiography during the middle ages. Maybe some more postcolonialism (maybe...) there is some explanation of postmodernism history you could leave out after all this is a um "textbook" so the reader can just go to my "chapter" to read about it, but it's still important in some spots for context. Look out for some wordiness, look for things that could be said quicker with more pop to them, avoid soft, kinda, statements unless it's something were evidence is **neccesary**, otherwise be **BOLD**. Good essay very informative with *superb use of quotations* to lock the message down!

+`Overall a well written and easy reading essay. Perhaps some perspective into the criticisms of feminist theories and postmodernism would be useful. Is postmodernism the only prevailing thought of the current era in historiography? What are the remnants of the Enlightenment and Rankean theories that early feminist historians challenged? Have they ceased to exist or have they adapted and evolved based on the criticisms they received?`

### Bibliography

Beauvoir, Simone de, et al. *The Second Sex*. New York : Alfred A. Knopf, 2010., 2010. cat05987a, Zimmerman Second Floor HQ1208.

Coletti, Theresa. “‘Did Women Have a Renaissance?’ A Medievalist Reads Joan Kelly and Aemilia Lanyer.” *Early Modern Women: An Interdisciplinary Journal*, vol. 8, 2013, pp. 249–59.

Fenstermaker, Sarah. “Dividing the Domestic: Men, Women, and Household Work in Cross-National Perspective.” *Contemporary Sociology*, vol. 40, no. 2, 2011, pp. 233–35. WorldCat.org.

Green, Anna, and Kathleen Troup. *The Houses of History: A Critical Reader in Twentieth-Century History and Theory*. New York : New York University Press, 1999., 1999. Zimmerman Second Floor D13.2 H64 1999.

Kelly, Joan. *Women, History & Theory : The Essays of Joan Kelly*. University of Chicago Press, 1984. WorldCat.org.

Scott, Joan W. “Gender: A Useful Category of Historical Analysis.” *American Historical Review*, vol. 91, no. 5, 1986, pp. 1053-75.

Southgate, Beverley C. *Postmodernism in History: Fear or Freedom?* Routledge, 2003, WorldCat.org.

Thompson, Willie. *Postmodernism and History*. Palgrave Macmillan, 2004. WorldCat.org.

West, Candace, and Sarah Fenstermaker. *Doing Gender, Doing Difference: Inequality, Power, and Institutional Change*. Routledge, 2002.
