### Emily Delcoure
# Historiography from the Bronze Age to Classical Greece (3300-400 BCE)
For millennia the history of the world and its people was told by mouth. Events were engraved in minds, not in stone, and stories shared for the sake of entertainment and lessons--the only sources being memories. When written records became less taboo, the known history was written down—in its most recent form—with the same number of sources as its oral predecessor. Truth was interchangeable with belief, and all history supported those beliefs; proving that even written history was recorded for less-than-neutral reasons. So how did history change during the time of the Greeks to allow for a person like Thucydides—a man that strove for the most accurate recollection of every event he wrote on—to even exist? It’s questions like this that historiography as a aims to answer. The Grecian historians did not just appear, they were formed by the historians that came before them, and the historiographical traditions that those ancient writers established. The Classical Period (700 BCE-400 CE) was defined by writers such as Herodotus, Thucydides, Pluto, Polybius, and Livy. Before them, though, there was an incalculable number of historians from all across the known world that influenced their works and inspired their passionate retelling of history.

Human history began, to our knowledge, on the continent of Africa. From Africa we see the oral traditions of prehistory emerge. African historiography typically covered past activities of people, because they believed that those activities largely influenced their present and their future. Their creation of culture was built around the concepts of “continuity and change, order and purpose” in regards to their place and role within the environment. Their belief in recounting the stories of the past was also defined by their communion with the gods, the dead, the living, and their future generations. They used these histories to explain the origins of their communities, ancestors, and the gods. The accuracy of their histories was important so they created more reliable ways of retelling stories—in lieu of just remembering—with myths, songs, proverbs, legends, riddles, poetry, and plays. While it was for the benefit of their culture as a whole these practices were perpetrated by kings, priests, diviners, elders, and “men of intelligence.” Egypt does lay on the continent of Africa, and for the most part conforms to these tenants of African historiography, they were one of the first civilizations to develop a system of writing, and progressed far past the oral traditions of the rest of Africa.

Egypt’s written history began at almost the same historical instant that they also organized themselves politically into a combined ruling of Upper and Lower Egypt under a “divine monarchy” that would drive their historiographical traditions from 3000 BCE onward. Most surviving sources were about the pharaohs or were literary projects monetarily supported by the pharaoh. It is less surprising then, that most of Egyptian history before the Ptolemaic Kings or Roman rule was chronologized and outlined by the 31 dynasties of pharaohs. In lieu of periods with descriptive titles (Renaissance, Industrial Revolution), the Egyptians literal time revolved around the pharaoh—and the pharaoh revolved around the gods. His (or her) power was directly descended from the gods. It was the gods around which all other aspects of life were ruled. Stories of human creation, who joined the two kingdoms, why the Nile (source of life) inundated each year, what made the sun rise each day were are chronicled in their written histories as historical fact—things that someone witnessed occurring—an unarguable truth. These truths were relatively unquestioned until Roman rule and the subsequent conversion to monotheistic religions. Though Egyptian culture ultimately intermingled with Greek and Roman culture, its influence on Greek historiographical traditions is less clear, hence its location on this particular breakdown of human history.

Although the civilization of Mesopotamia--and the Babylonians that inhabited the region--appeared first, their influence on Greek historians is much more direct than the historians of Egypt. From the Babylonians came Assyrian historiographical traditions, and from Assyria came the Persians. The Persians of Grecian times only vaguely resembled the Babylonians or Assyrians in culture, but their traditions of using history stayed with the Persian Empire well into the modern era. In Babylonian and Assyrian history and culture rhetoric, ideologies, and propaganda were key in sharing the events and traditions of their day. Babylonian historiography can be broken down into two types of writing: kings commemorating their buildings to the gods; and lists of kings, their time of reign, with the occasional legend or tale of war. The Assyrians adopted only one of these traditions: commemorating buildings the king built to the gods. Things changed for the Assyrians in ~1100 BCE under Tiglath Pileser I, when annalistic traditions began to appear on the inscriptions of buildings. These “display” inscriptions evolved from architectural information to lists of areas conquered, who did it, and when. It was this tradition of shaming the conquered and rewarding the conqueror that Persia—and subsequently Greece—took away from the Assyrian empire. The best example of this can be seen in the Persian acceptance of Alexander the Great as their leader after he took control from King Darius. In the histories that survived it is said that Darius accepted Alexander as the King of Persia before he was completely defeated because of Alexander’s treatment of Darius’ female family members. This propaganda on the chivalry and gentlemanly nature of Alexander comes from “the people” as the original source cites them.

Herodotus, the man Cicero considered the father of history, never explicitly cites previous or contemporary historians as his inspiration for a more fact-based record of history—neither does Thucydides. Alas, still they took their inspirations from societies as a whole: Egypt, Persia, previous Greek writers. They saw their versions of history and found better ways to write them. Greek historiography is the dialectical synthesis of creation myth and legend versus the intellectual integrity that is characteristic of Classical Greece. Though the subjects of history remained the same throughout Greek writing, the way the subjects were written on changed dramatically. No longer would there be only Homer’s version of the Trojan War and its outcomes—or one perspective on anything for that matter. The Greek historians that followed Herodotus and Thucydides were all but paralyzed by the accounts necessary to write a complete history…

The effects of Greek historiography on Rome, and subsequently the rest of the world… Polybius as the contact of transfer between Greek and Roman traditions…

The term “historian” itself takes on a different meaning in Pre-Classical Ancient history. A historian could be any one person, a community of people using collective memory to piece together their world, or one single man—above them all—set to write a one-sided history of an entire population based on the actions of a single man (very rarely a woman). A historian once was simply the person that was currently speaking about history. In the Classical Period that all changed. Historian became a specialized position, the position itself suggested knowledge and analysis skills that no “regular” person naturally had. The transition from creation myth to chronicle might have seemed an abrupt one—but it was ultimately unavoidable in sequence…
