
In Defense of Madness
-
#### Editor: Emily Hartshorn
**The Postmodern experiment of narrative**

~Postmodernist history:~ Rarely has one particular school of history caused such controversy within the ranks of historians `as postmodernism has`. Why does such a vehement disdain of this philosophical framework appear when fellow historians seemingly fall victim to the postmodernist thought? `(This line doesn't make a ton of sense. Maybe try rewording?)` **The ~simple~ most basic answer, I’d suggest, is the obstruction of simple meaning.** (Needs transistion) History, on its face, relies on what most believe is a well-structured grand narrative allowing historians to write within a well-defined categories building upon past knowledge. The well-structured narrative belief fits into an analogy of a house, built brick by brick through the works of countless historians. This constructionist categorization of history prescribes an idea that there is an entirely objective element of historical structure that with enough dedication can be completed. ~This enticing belief in a total history plays on our basic human desire to find identity in an obscure past, but the reality is that history is massively complex and requires an open, abstract view of the past.~ `(While not a bad sentence, it seems to just be stating that same things that you've already said. I would say it is unnecessary)` Postmodernists reject professional history, the `old school` total history narrative ~of old school, professional history,~ and because of this they open themselves up to the divisiveness of their own historical structure. ~For the postmodernist, history exists within an abstract realm of general form.~ **I offer that postmodernists may use history not to define a rigid past but to question the complacency of our own basic understanding of the past.**  

`previously, historians did not question the status quo, which lulled them into a sense of contentment, when really there was a lot of problems within the field of historiography. While this is beautifully worded, it just seems like a lot of excess words that don't serve a purpose.`

Of the many postmodern `historians`, Michel Foucault is a particularly divisive figure. Foucault’s writing is abstract, strange, and challenging; picking apart the intellectual structure of the world around him. To even bring Foucault into a discussion of historiography is challenging because of the chaotic nature of his own intellectualism. Rebellious in nature, the histories Foucault wrote were reactionary to the frustrations and hardships that challenged him in his life. He targeted the accepted social behaviors and developments in the fields of medicine, psychiatry, sex, and crime `(Add examples here)`. Foucault felt strongly that society needed to begin questioning our histories through the conceptual categories we create for our own understanding. What troubled Foucault was blind acceptance of learned conditions and instead challenged readers to begin examining the categorical bias we impose or simply allow in our daily lives. 

`This is a good basic intro to the works of Foucault. Maybe reference some of his works to prove your point about him challenging the new man made categories. I made a paragraph break here because it seemed like the second half of the paragraph was a new thought.`

It is his own personal philosophy that he translates into a historical approach that is unique among scholarship because it exists outside of standard meticulous source citation; instead Foucault lives within a conceptual realm of narrative. By understanding his own narrative`, he` inserts a profound aspiration to celebrate isolated aspects of histories as meaningful lessons from the past. ~Foucault’s desire to question the histories we had commonly accepted extended deeper than the subjects addressed in his own historical writing, what emerged was foundational elements to engaging history with a sense of exploration and nostalgia.~ To this end, Foucault’s histories exploded into abstract nightmares for strict “proper” historians who owed all knowledge to deep archival interaction `(I love this!)`. Because of Foucault’s fundamental flaw of not rooting his work in the traditional historical method, it’s difficult to utilize Foucault’s literal writing in ~a~ serious professional work, however, his message extends past words he’s written because he invokes the need to understand narrative and meaning in all texts. 

`I like that you address the flaws within Foucault's career, as that is a big issue that many historians have with him.`

**The meaning of nothing**

Meaning in text is at the center of postmodern scholarship. The evaluation of narrative in historical scholarship challenges the pretense of well-defined truth. Naturally`,` postmodernist felt that truth was not easily obtainable through strict research alone. Instead, history to postmodern thinkers was a truth that existed as a relative ideal found within the context of ~~society’s~~ `societies` current culture. Truth within history is meant to be expressed for the purpose of narrative storytelling. This is not meant to say that all history is made up, or should be cherry picked by the historian to create destructive narratives. Allowing group identity to be warped by fictitious beliefs of their past is harmful not only to that group but to the stability of their society. It would be mad to exclude commonly held historical fact in dates from histories`,` and as a general rule Postmodernists will dissect a larger meaning from the archives. Th`e` lessons they learn can be individualized for the reader or author and is dependent on the manner in which the historical facts are analyzed. 

`This paragraph conveys your thoughts on narrative well, but there is no sources or facts to back up what you are saying. Summary: Postmodernists tried to step away from the belief that everything was factual and that they shouldn't question other histories. But they should still recognize dates/times`

Postmodernists accept that there is a general, factual basis that history `rests upon` ~~relies on~~. Without the historian pulling together these elements of fact into a cohesive meaning then historical fact becomes exclusively `(I would use a different word here - exclusively sounds weird)` trivial. The historian must function as a non-fiction storyteller. The crucial element for any storyteller is the narrative and purpose of the history they portray. The ~~quality of the~~ historian can impart meaning where none may have been previously; this elevates the historian, who holds tremendous power over the narrative they illuminate. When a postmodernist examines the purposes of narrative in history`,` they make a conscious effort to realize the biases they have in the discourse of a topic. **The examination of these narrative biases are crucial to the presentation of the past as fact.** ~~Postmodernists are hesitant to explicitly state that their explanation of the past is the most accurate depiction.~~ The historical narrative is too complex to ever expressly accept the fact of causation within the past. Too many unexplainable and missing variables exist in the past to dictate why one historical actor behaved the way they did. So, we must examine the meaning behind the actions, the reasons why such actions or symbols were important in development, and accept that the answers might always be ambiguous. 
**(Needs more Foucault)** 

`summary: historians, when narrarating their own work, or reading someone elses narraration, always need to be aware of their own inherent biases. Interesting concept, but needs to be backed up by evidence from Foucault's writing.`

The most controversial element of postmodern~~ist~~ history will always be the unyielding element of questioning accepted historical “fact”`.` ~~but~~ `Frankly,` we must cautiously ask ourselves what are these facts that we should accept. We should look for histories that have legitimate factual sources but also pull a deeper wisdom out of the results of the changes they’ve presented. By simply questioning meaning we internalize a deeper, profound message from the lessons of the past. The purpose of postmodern~~ist~~ history is not `to` allow baseless revisionism but to simply change the **relation of history to the purpose of its end goal.** `(This is a great sentence that is lost within a LOT of other words. Maybe add some bolding or just break it up a little?)` This incites the usage of narrative within historical literature. The basic structure of storytelling is the cornerstone of historical research, it forces the historian to accept the need to put together `a` purpose for the reader. ~~The postmodernist goal~~ `The goal of the postmodernist` is to understand the deeper implementation of the narrative within history, the realization that meaning goes beyond the literal facts that the author hopes to share. The meaning of the histories we write take on their own life in a manner that can never be objectively pinned down. Instead the historian should see the work as a method to propose meaning.  It can be a terrifying prospect to accept strict`,` objective`,` historical facts have no _accurate_ meaning.  ~~But we should reveal in the challenge of exploring the narrative `that` historians are presenting before you, shouldn’t a curious intellectual crave the exploration of their own limitations?~~ `(This sentence is super confusing)` By these same processes we should understand that we live within a state of relativism ~~as it is~~. The nature of our world is often to blindly accept the reality we’ve become socialized to. We must question ourselves, not to uproot our own code of values and reality, but to understand why we believe the way we do. What decisions ~~of~~ `and` influences lead ~~to~~ us to understand our past, present, and future? Just within ourselves we must examine a deeper sense of guidance in our actions, how can we write history without doing the same. **Causation is not simple in human behavior and if we are to relate ourselves to the past we must also see how the past relates to our present.** 


Notes: Can relate post colonialism on discussion of bias; need more implementation of Foucault as to not have one isolated paragraph about him, and generally round out explanation of how postmodernism relates to historiography as a whole. Also the obvious include in text citations.

`Edits: Overall, you conveyed the meaning of postmodernism in a very well crafted way. It is a great essay, there just needs to have citations. Your style was almost a mirror of Foucault, which is hilarious, as I hate the man. But you do a great job at discussing Foucault, while also sounding like him. I wasn't sure if the things I bolded were supposed to be titles?? But I bolded them anyway. This is very beautifully written, and you really have a great grasp on word flow. Maybe cut down some of the sentence legths, as well as paragraph lengths. I would also include more citations!! I would also recommend some more history on how these changed came to be. I know you aren't doing the history of postmodernism, but maybe some history about where these changes are coming from could give your paper more backing.`

FG: great start and i agree you've covered many of the basics very eloquently (although plenty of sentence need some refinement and/or clarification). focus on CITATIONS so you don't tank your final grade. after that, focus on contextualizing postmodernist history a little more. can you give a sense of how it was building through the 20th century?--and this will give you lots of opportunity to tie it into other course themes. ALSO: be careful that you're keeping a clear distinction between historical fact, interpretation, and narrative. sometimes you are clear about their distinctions, sometimes you blur them together. remember that these distinctions will be potentially unfamiliar to your intended audience, but are all implicated by postmodern historical thinking in different (even if related) ways. 
