### Marxism and its Historical Significance
Jerome T. Mondragon

With `When` the Age of Enlightenment had just appeared in Europe, the Western world ~~was~~ now entering a new age of science, art, and history. It was a time when history was exclusively focused on the accomplishments of religious and royal authority figures (Popkins, 57). It was also during this time when industrialization and international dependency began to emerge `expand a bit on this thought`. Old methods of industry were being replaced with the mass production of goods, a growing economy, and the creation of a new capitalist market. The unfortunate consequence with the rise of industry was the division of classes. As these differences `in class` became `more` apparent, the interpretation of history drastically changed `because of?` Thus, Marxist movement emerged in the 1800s as a means to represent the disadvantaged class (Marx and Engles `year ,` 20).  ~~~Historians now focused on the social and economic disparities that existed.~~ 

`So the new way writing of history also caused a new way of looking at past history writings too, through the lens of Marxism?  
Good introduction to Marxism, but could use a clearer thesis. *Why* should we care about this new way of viewing history?` 

To understand the  movement, it's `no contractions they should be spelled out` important to understand its creator. The most important figure of the movement is ~~of course~~ Karl Marx. The entire movement is named after him. Without him, there wouldn't be a movement! `Just a bit repetitive!` He and his contemporary, Frederick Engles, formulated the commanding literature on the subject, _Communist Manifesto_, `Did you mean to put a period here instead of a comma?` Devised in the Fall of 1848, the pamphlet was a theoretical and practical program for the emerging Communist Party. ***Its purpose was to reflect, `no commas before a quote` "...the history of the modern working class." `maybe combine these two sentences with a  preposition` The ultimate goal of the working class was to shift the balance of power in their favor by gaining control of the economic and political systems (Marx and Engles `year`, 30)***. Thus, the _Manifesto_ was an important historical outline to initiate social and economic change. `but what did the Manifesto do that had not been done before?` 

`Overall, good paragraph but still do not feel like I understand why this was important to history?` 

Social `and class` differences were nothing new in history `but what was new about Marxism?`. Marx and Engles admitted there has always been a class that has been subservient to another since the Roman Empire (Marx and Engles `year`, 9). Enlightenment authors such as Machiavelli focused on the Italian power struggles while presenting the perspective of the common people (Machiavelli `year`, 4). What is `was` new in the Marxist era was its emphasis on the ___Industrial Revolution as the iconic factor for the social and economic inequalities___. `maybe rearrange that previous sentence` E.P. Thompson mentions in _Exploitation_, "The physical instruments of production were seen as giving rise in a direct and more-or-less compulsive way to new social relationships, institutions, and cultural modes." (Thompson p. 46) `this quotes needs an explanation` Marx also mentions, "Modern industry has converted the little workshop of the patriarchal master into the great factory of the industrial capitalists (Marx and Engles, 16).”  Two classes emerged from this system:  the controlling _bourgeoisie_, and the subordinate _proletarians_ (Marx and Engles, 10-11)." `Also the quotation marks are not in the right spot.` 

`I feel like this paragraph had too many quotes without enough explanation, and it also ends with a quote, which you should not do.` 

With two distinct classes identified, ___Marxist historians specifically focuses `focused` on the viewpoint of the worker___. British historian E.P. Thompson describes the plight of the worker by explaining the uneasy relationship between the employee and employer. Initially, the employers are the rulers of their enterprise because they profit from workers' labor, ` no comma replace with by` keeping their pay low, and finally `eventually` subduing their moral. `morale`.  It's `It is` an unjust economic system in place in which the worker can't `cannot` escape. The employee must retain his job in order to obtain the reproductive needs including food, clothing, and shelter (Rockmore, 490). Workers ~~can't~~`are unable to` quit because ~~they'll~~ `they feared gaining a` ~~gain a~~ bad reputation and `not being rehired.` ~~~no won't be rehired~~. The employee ~~must ultimately submit~~ `ultimately submits` to his employer's bidding and endure `endures` their horrible abuse (Thompson p. 54). They are `the` victims of the emerging, yet perpetual industrial system. Indeed, Thompson also identifies ___the factory as the iconic symbol of oppression___`maybe change the bolding here to just "the factory"` `which` ~~He~~ provides a glimpse of working conditions in 19th Century England. The factory created the dreadful working conditions which were  attributed to the increase of manufacture `manufacturing`, rising population in the cities, and technological innovations (Thompson p. 47). The factories were worse than those experienced by plantation slaves in the American South. `is this from Thompson too?` Whereas slaves work outside and might get a cool breeze, factory workers are locked in hot and unventilated rooms for hours with no rest (Thompson p. 55).  

`Again do not end a paragraph with a quotation. Suggested that you change some bolding, rewrite some sentences to combine thoughts, and add an explanation at the end after quote.` 

Marxism was no doubt influenced by the Enlightenment movement `and the creation of the printing press`. Events such as the 1789 French Revolution demonstrated that ordinary people were active participants of history and they were control of their own destiny (Popkin `year`, 71). The printing press created by Johannes Guttenberg increased the quantity and distribution of written texts to the public (Popkin, 53-54). Marxist literature and ~~its~~ ideas spread like wildfire across the world because it ~~related~~ `was relatable to` to the desperate working class (Lenin, 20-21).  However, the ruling class had exclusive control of what is `was` to be read. `maybe combine these sentences` Literature was heavily monitored and edited the ruling class. It took brilliant Marxist authors, such as Vladimir Lenin, to find creative methods, which included disguising their true meaning of messages, to escape government censors (Lenin, 20-21). `add another explanation here summing up the way the Enlightenment influenced Marxism` 

`Clarify some thoughts and combine some sentences, add more explanation to your quotations. Add some bolding and italics too!` 

Vladimir Lenin was an important Marxist figure because he wasn’t `was not` merely just a Marxist historian, but also an active participant in history. `In what way?` What makes Lenin unique to historiographical literature is passion and dedication to the cause. `How was he passionate and dedicated?`  B.B. Kendrick admits that, ___"...no proposition is more susceptible of historical truth than that there is a tendency for various economic groups to become aware of their class interests and to work consciously for the fulfillment of ends which they consider good___ (Marx and Engles, 27)." `why is this quote here?` `no need to italicize and bold your entire quote, change the quotation marks to be just around the quote itself not the source at the end`  `This` must be done by a charismatic leader or individual `what is?`. In _What is to be Done?_ written `in 1901` `by` Lenin, he mentions `mentioned` that the, `no comma` "role of vanguard can be fulfilled only by a party that is guided by an advanced theory (Lenin, 28). ~~Written in 1901~~, it `It` is an outline for Marxist policies in the Russia at that time. `what was going on in Russia?` The tone of this work presented in an authoritative yet condescending manner. `combine these two sentences` This was necessary awaken the workers, trade unions, and peasants into class consciousness. (Lenin, 31-35)`period goes here` Thus, Lenin was the individual ~~to~~ `that` lead Russia in a bloody revolt against the aristocrats. Through his intelligence, charming character, and his captivating writings, Lenin was able "emancipation of the workers" and abolition of old systems as the Manifesto had decreed. (Marx and Engles 6, 20). `okay but so what? why should we care about what Lenin did? How did this event alter historiography?` 

`Interesting paragraph but needs more explanation of how Lenin utilzied Marxism and how that altered historiography` 

Western 20th century historians like Gordon Watkins, Emile Vandervelde, and E.P. Thompson offer their own perspective and interpretation on `of` Marxism from their own unique countries. As noted in the Enlightenment era, nationalism was on the rise in the 18th Century as countries attempted to preserve their own cultures and unique identities (Popkin `year,` 70). `I feel like Stalin just came out of nowhere in this paragraph. You went from talking about the West to Stalin.`  Believe it or not, but Joseph Stalin was quite the national expert. `or do you mean expert in nationalism?` In `his book` _Marxism and the National Question_, he meticulously describes `past tense` the requirements of nationhood as, `no comma` "historically constituted, stable community of people, formed on the basis of a common language, territory, economic life and psychological make-up manifested in a common culture `need quotation marks here` (Stalin, `year` 12-13). `Connect these two sentences with something like "This differs from/is similar to"` Marx understood how Marxism and Communism will differ in separate countries (Marx and Engels, 20). These additional factors explain how Marxism was accepted and inevitably successful in some countries, and not successful in others. `For example,` Russian Marxism literature eventually reached and inspired workers throughout Europe and the United States (Watkins, 20). `It was seen in the West when in 1919 when` ~~As the~~ 54,000 people ~~voting~~ `voted` for the Communist Party ~~during the 1919~~ New York primary elections can attest `that` Americans were aware of class disparities (Watkins, 14).  Emile Vandervelde argues in the _Ten Years of Socialism in Europe_, that `no need to capitalize whether`  "Whether they have read a line of Marx or not, there is not a coal-miner in Yorkshire...who does not join with the social-democrats (Vandervelde, 560)." 
`Interesting paragraph but needs more explanation of the quotes that you used and a sentence at the end. Why was Marxism popular in the West? What impact did it have on historiography?` 

Whereas Marxism might have been successful in Europe, it was not the United States. Western historians are different from Eastern European authors,`no comma` because they drastically ___criticize its usefulness in a capitalist society___. `the usefullness of Marxism?` Written in 1920, the `book?` _Revolutionary Communism in the United States_ ~~is~~ `was` a deep criticism of Marxist politics in the U.S. The author Gordon Watkins outlines the function, structure, and demise of `the United State's` ~~country’s~~ Communist parties. There were two distinct parties within the country: the Socialist and Communist parties. The Socialists promoted economic change through the use of politics. They encouraged their members to participate in voting, be nominated as public officials, or become elected official to expose Capitalist corruption. The Communists decreed that change can only occur through violent action, like the Russian Revolution (Watkins, 20). To do this, they needed help from the unions (Watkins, 20). Their strategy was, `no comma` "...the conquest of power in the industrial unions may become the starting point of the communist reconstruction of society (Watkins, 26). `This proved to be` easier said than done. Neither the Socialist nor the Communist parties could agree whether economic and political change should be initiated by political intervention, or `from` violent struggle (Watkins, 19). Watkins sums up the American problem by stating, “[the] American workman are too prosperous to become susceptible to revolutionary political and industrial philosophy (Watkins, 14).” 
`Expand on that last sentence and add more explanation` 

Marxism was certainly dramatic movement for its time, it could not have occurred without certain conditions to transpire. What set Marxism writing from other historical time periods was its emphasis on social and economic conditions caused by industrial conditions. The movement was a great influence towards post colonialism in the struggle against colonialism and imperial empires (Green and Troup, 277-278). In the _Problem with Histortical Interpretation_, B.B. Kendrick mentions, "...philosophers and the economist can teach us something about the interpretation of history, it can't teach us everything. (Kendrick, 27)." History is all about timing and placement! All of these conditions had to be met for the movement to be successful. Marxism was indeed, "revolutionary." for its time. Pun intended.

`Eden's comments: Easy to follow and interesting but just needs clarity in some places.` 


References `I recommend getting rid of the - before each author and adding the years to each citation in your essay` 

-Green, Anna, and Kathleen Troup. The Houses of History : A Critical Reader in Twentieth-	Century History and Theory. New York : New York University Press, 1999., 1999. 277-278.

-Kendrick, B. B. “THE PROBLEM OF HISTORICAL INTERPRETATION.” The North Carolina Historical Review 2, no. 1 (1925): 19–29.

-Korsch, Karl, and Otto Koester. “The Crisis of Marxism.” New German Critique, no. 3 (1974): 7. https://doi.org/10.2307/487734.

-Lenin, Vladimir. What Is to Be Done? [Burning Questions of Our Movement]. Martino Fine Books, 2013.

-Marx, Karl, Frederick Engles. The Communist Manifesto. International Publishers Co., 2014.

-Popkin, Jeremy D. From Herodotus to H-Net : The Story of Historiography. New York ; 	Oxford : Oxford University Press, [2016], 2016.

-Spargo, John. “The Influence of Karl Marx on Contemporary Socialism.” American Journal of Sociology 16, no. 1 (1910): 21–40.

-Stalin, Joseph. Marxism and the National Question. CreateSpace Independent Publishing Platform, 2013.

-Thompson, E.B., "Exploitation", The Houses of History: A Critical Reader in Twentieth-Century History and Theory. New York: New York University Press, 1999., 1999. 44-58.

-Vandervelde, Emile. “Ten Years of Socialism in Europe.” Foreign Affairs 3, no. 4 (1925): 556. https://doi.org/10.2307/20028399.

-Watkins, Gordon S. “Revolutionary Communism in the United States.” American Political Science Review 14, no. 01 (February 1920): 14–33. https://doi.org/10.2307/1945723.

Recommended Readings

-Simkhovitch, Vladimir G. “Marxism Versus Socialism. II.” Political Science Quarterly 23, no. 4 (December 1908): 652. https://doi.org/10.2307/2140867.

-———. “Marxism Versus Socialism. III.” Political Science Quarterly 24, no. 2 (June 1909): 236. https://doi.org/10.2307/2140818.

-Vladimir G. Simkhovitch. “Marxism Versus Socialism. I.” The Academy of Political Science, Political Science Quarterly, Vol. 23, no. No. 4 (June 1908): 652–89. https://doi.org/10.2307/2141322.

-Vladimir Zenzinov. “The Bolsheviks and the Peasant.” Council on Foreign Relations, Foreign Relations, 4, no. 1 (October 1925): 134–43. https://doi.org/10.2307/20028428.



