### The Value of Film in History

Film, used as and for history has several advantages over textual sources **A picture is worth a thousand words. If this is so, the value of film to history should be self-evident.** When watching a film or documentary, as an average person, one is immersed in a moment in history in a way that reading a text could never accomplish. ~For one- this,~ as historians we can be more objective in our observations of footage from the past. We can identify that the events being filmed did indeed happen, assuming the footage wasn’t doctored. For another (Also), humans are creatures ruled by their senses. We interact with the world visually, ~and~ thus it makes sense for a visual medium to have more profound emotional impacts on us. Still images via photography can capture iconic moments, which on their own can alter the “course of history” and films about history bring the “past to life” and helps viewers better relate to the characters and events of that past. **Narratives within film can therefore be more powerful than they might otherwise be, allowing a historian to more fully engage with his audience. Nontextual sources are therefore uniquely positioned to communicate the emotional impact of historical events.** (Why is this important to historiography generally)
	
There are two basic types of film to be used as a historical artifact, with an entire spectrum of possible expression in between. The first is **unedited footage**, (the footage is) as close to the raw event as possible. The second is **film which has been carefully crafted and shot with some intention in mind; be it propaganda or art.** Everything along this spectrum is valuable as a historical artifact, though of course it must be watched with a critical eye. First off, let’s examine unedited footage. Raw footage has been used to document history since the end of the 19th century. **Thomas Edison famously took a short film of soldiers unloading cargo in Tampa, Florida on May 1898.** These images carry a curious potency to the historian; to quote Janna Jones in her work, *The Past is a Moving Picture: Preserving the Twentieth Century on Film*, **“These moving images resurrected the city and the soldiers in a way photographs could not. Edison’s moving images of a Tampa that existed one hundred years ago were a compelling reminder of how a city’s past can disappear from the landscape and from memory” (Jones, 3-4).** Does that last sentence need to be bolded? Why?
	
This sort of footage can bring more poignant memories to light, forcing society to accept the reality of a situation it would rather avoid. For example, the footage used during the **Nuremberg trials** (1945-1946, trails held by the Allied forces against 22 Nazi criminals), was used as evidence for the first time during these trials. Camera operators and filmmakers such as **George Stevens, John Huston, Frank Capra, Samuel Fuller and Billy Wilder were deployed to capture the horrific conditions of the war. Filmmakers were allowed into concentration camps to document the atrocities committed there** (Wilson, Film and Genocide, pp.7). Nazis soldiers and officers, however unwittingly, aided in their own prosecution by utilizing photographers, such as Wilhelm Brasse to take portraits of their victims. “From clandestine glimpses of persecution and extermination snatched by bystanders and underground members and the grinning, shameless, and triumphant images captured by the Nazis and their collaborators to record their ‘mastery,’ to the newsreels and photojournalism of liberation taken as twofold evidence: here is evidence of the unthinkable crimes committed and also literal, judicial evidence collated for the anticipated war crimes trials.” (Wilson, pp 22-23). George Stevens’ footage, as well as that of many others, formed the backbone of evidence against many Nazis party members and leaders for the trials that followed. Nevertheless, it is the sheer emotional impact of these haunting films which is staggering. **Barbie Zelizer notes, “Although atrocity stories had been around as long as war itself, never before had the press come face to face with such extensive evidence of mass brutality and such an ability to document it. Covering the scenes of horror in the camps required overcoming both assumptions about earlier atrocity stories and inadequate standards that existed for depicting violence in word and image”** (Wilson, pp. 7). Texts can capture a broader theme, a larger story, film has the ability to narrow in on the particular horrors or scenes of hope of a past occurrence. While texts might be dismissed as exaggerated or misconstrued, the films and photos of the Holocaust taken by Stevens are hard to deny. 
	
The images of the Holocaust provide an important tool for historians. If one of the purposes of studying history is to remember past mistakes and avoid them in the future, then genocide may be the biggest mistake to avoid. Holocaust deniers make headlines even today. As the last of the survivors of the Holocaust die of old age, how then are we as a society to remember their pain and loss? **“…such material, utilized as evidence, defends against both Holocaust denial and the more understandable desire of society to believe that ‘such things cannot be possible’…”** (Wilson, pp 21). Unedited footage of historical events provides a substantial counterpoint to claims that atrocities have been faked. Of course, there will still always be those who suggest that raw footage can be staged as well and I will discuss this potential problem further in the upcoming paragraph. I argue though that at least as importantly, looking into the eyes of a prisoner of a concentration camp is extremely emotional and haunting in a way that a textual source could not achieve. “The camera readily changes our audience perspective from zero to internal focalization (when the agent becomes the focaliser). Thus, focalization changes meaning, understanding and explanation” (Munslow, Narrative and History, pp. 50).

**This is not to say that unedited footage is not without flaws.** For one, current technology undermines the authenticity which is its cardinal virtue. For example, even with the footage taken of Nazi concentration camps some of the images were staged. “In one instance, Fuller and some fellow soldiers ordered local Germans, under threat of death, to carry out a burial and funeral procession for those who had perished in the camp.” (Wilson pp.7-8) If one can’t absolutely trust that a film hasn’t been staged or edited, that the images it contains are accurate, what then is the use of such films? To this day we still have some conspiracy theorists who deny the Moon Landings despite “visual evidence” to the contrary. **Ricoeur** makes the point that, “history ‘reinscribes the time of narrative within the time of the universe’ Without doubt the ‘temporal turn’ is central to historical narrative thinking and practice. Given that the past cannot be re-lived as it actually was (because it no longer exists), all the historian can do is ‘manage’ recorded memories of it by putting them into a narrative and regulating ‘real time’ in the process” (Munslow, pp. 51). **Perfect trust in accuracy is not a viable standard to achieve in any medium**, as one can see from the case of the **Donation of Constantine**, a faked document which was accepted as historical fact for centuries (Popkin, From Herodotus to H-Net, pp. 48). 

**Insert paragraph. As I have noted above, textual history can also be faked, altered, or interrupted differently based on the biases of one scholar versus another. **Need to elaborate more on textual history, specific examples. Maybe discussion of “lenses”, more on value of narration which can then lead into next paragraph on propaganda.

What about films that occupy the other end of the spectrum? Films which have obviously been carefully crafted and staged with the intention of manipulating the audience? **I need more here explaining the propaganda films that helped lead the American people to be more unified on WWII. Notes from FIVE CAME BACK Documentary. “If the propaganda gave you the reason to into the war, the footage of the liberation of the camps, what these men saw, proved the enormity of the task was worth it.” (Guillermo del Toro, Five Came Back, ep. # ?). More on TRIUMPH OF THE WILL vs Capra’s WHY WE FIGHT**

It must be noted that the propaganda nature of these films **does not negate their potential use as a viable historical source**. Rather, one must look at them with a critical eye towards their unreliable narrator. Through a critical lens a historian can still derive knowledge from what the filmmakers wanted to portray and what they unintentionally portrayed. **Historian John E. O’Connor portrayed four means of analyzing films:** “…(1) moving-image documents as representations of history; (2) moving-image documents as evidence for social and cultural history; (3) moving-image documents as evidence for historical fact; and (4) moving image documents as evidence for the history of film and television” (O’Conner, Image as Artifact, pp. 23) The first and second are applicable to propaganda.

**Historical dramas present a dilemma to historians that is different from propaganda or unedited footage.** Richard N. Current, a Civil War historian, observed that historical dramas "take liberties with the facts, or at best, select those that have the greatest visual effect." (Toplin/Eudy, *The Historian Encounters Film*, pp.9). Reality and fantasy "blend more and more into an inseparable mix" in television and Hollywood productions, he complained (Toplin, pp. 9). David Herlihy’s critique that, “film, unlike scholarship, did not reveal the source of its evidence and, therefore, often it did not allow the quality of criticism leveled against its narratives.” (Toplin/Eudy, pp 8) The fact that many people seem to take historical films as factual is even more dangerous. **Robert Rosenstone is quoted, “We now know that many people outside the classroom are not learning about history from reading books or from engaging in primary source research; instead, they are learning what they know about the past from engaging with media such as film, web based media, or videogames”** (Stoddard, More Than "Showing What Happened", pp. 84).

**This does not negate the use of historical dramas for historians so much as shape the way those narratives can be used and taught.** Mark Carnes, for example, argues that they are still useful, as they “often teach truths about the human condition.” (Toplin, pp. 9). While the history depicted is certainly not accurate in every detail, it can stimulate useful dialogues about the past. In The Past is a Foreign Country, David Lowenthal took the somewhat postmodernist stance (see Jacob’s essay on Postmodernism in history) that any depiction of history incorporates necessarily a certain amount of distortion. **“Better a misinformed enjoyment of history than none, a lighthearted dalliance with the past than a wholesale rejection of it”** (Popkin, 154-156). Robert Rosenstone argued that it is this very inaccuracy to the details which allows the history to feel more immersive. “The camera’s need to fill out the specifics of a particular historical scene, or to create a coherent (and moving) visual sequence, will always ensure large doses of invention in the historical film… All films will include fictional people or invented elements of character…to keep the story moving, to maintain intensity of feeling, to simplify complexity of events into plausible dramatic structure that will fit within filmic time constraints…on the screen, history must be fictional in order to be true!” (Popkin, pp. 177). If accompanied with sufficient correction of facts, even blockbuster films can have their place in drawing the interest and emotional intensity of students. 

**Insert paragraph discussing more about "film as history writing". Narrative of history. Affects of narrative for cultures and societies. 

**Need another paragraph relating more to social implications of films, comparison of Birth of Nation vs Roots. Mention of videos documententing police brutality, implications for social justice.

**The general public will always be interested in historical films, photography, and documentaries.** Arguments about the potential reliability of footage is pointless when it disregards the public’s view of history. History through film will never and can never be one hundred percent accurate (though neither can textual history), but that does not mean that all of the historic films we possess are staged or doctored either. What matters is the narrative and immersion film provides. These stories help us remember and understand the past in a much more visceral, immediate way than texts can achieve. Historical film and movies should still absolutely be subjected to rigorous analysis. **However, to say that film is worthless as a historical medium due to its potential or realized inaccuracies is to miss the point of how humanity views itself**. Humanity uses the study of history to define and understand its existence, to preserve and honor the memory of those long dead. History lets us believe that our lives and accomplishments are not meaningless and allows us to condemn atrocities against one another. History is a narrative, it is a story of the past. **History through film is just one more way to let the stories of the past be remembered and understood for the our present environment.** Great essay! I think you notes on inserting more information and conncections to past reading will really bring the paper together.


**Sources:**
“(5) Five Came Back Trailer: Netflix WWII Documentary - YouTube.” Accessed April 9, 2018. https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=KmQvEVeGj5c.

Barber, Sian. “Film Historiography - Manchester Scholarship,” July 1, 2015. http://manchester.universitypressscholarship.com/view/10.7228/manchester/9780719090301.001.0001/upso-9780719090301-chapter-004.

Jones, Janna. The Past Is a Moving Picture: Preserving the Twentieth Century on Film. Florida, UNITED STATES: University Press of Florida, 2012. http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/unm/detail.action?docID=990868.

Munslow, Alun. Narrative and History. Theory and History. Basingstoke : Palgrave Macmillan, 2007., 2007.

O’Connor, John E. “Image as Artifact: Historians and the Moving-Image Media.” OAH Magazine of History 16, no. 4 (2002): 23–23.

Popkin, Jeremy D. From Herodotus to H-Net: The Story of Historiography. New York ; Oxford University Press, 2016.

Rosenstone, Robert A. “History in Images/History in Words: Reflections on the Possibility of Really Putting History onto Film.” The American Historical Review 93, no. 5 (1988): 1173–85. https://doi.org/10.2307/1873532.

Stoddard, Jeremy D., and Alan S. Marcus. “More Than ‘Showing What Happened’: Exploring the Potential of Teaching History with Film.” The High School Journal 93, no. 2 (2010): 83–90.

Talens, Jenaro, and Santos Zunzunegui. “Toward a ‘True’ History of Cinema: Film History as Narration.” Boundary 2 24, no. 1 (1997): 1–34. https://doi.org/10.2307/303750 Toplin, Robert Brent, and Jason Eudy. “The Historian Encounters Film: A Historiography.” OAH Magazine of History 16, no. 4 (2002): 7–12.

Toplin, Robert Brent. “From the Editor: Invigorating History: Using Film in the Classroom.” OAH Magazine of History 16, no. 4 (2002): 5–6.

Toplin, Robert Brent, and Jason Eudy. “The Historian Encounters Film: A Historiography.” OAH Magazine of History 16, no. 4 (2002): 7–12.

Wilson, Kristi M., Tomas F. Crowder-Taraborrelli, and Tomas F Crowder-Taraborrelli. Film and Genocide. Wisconsin, UNITED STATES: University of Wisconsin Press, 2012. http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/unm/detail.action?docID=3445214.
