## Historical Sociology

`Be careful about verb tense throughout your essay` 

Historical Sociology is a discipline `(is it it's own discipline?)` that focuses on change in societies and allows `(?)` the scholar to understand the historical reasoning behind societal change. History and sociology are two disciplines that many do not see as being compatible, when in fact can be very useful `when used together`. ~~The thought of scholarly disciplines being mixed often makes scholars cringe.~~ `unncessary` In this essay I explain these two disciplines separately and then collectively `reword this sentance and include time period`. ~~This essay will focus on the mid to late 20th century because this is the time period historical sociology begins being discussed as a discipline.~~ ~~I hope~~ `Through this` essay ~~the reader~~ `you` will see the importance of exploring other disciplines~~, especially~~ when writing history. ~~So much can be taken from other disciplines to add to historical writing. History and sociology are two disciplines that many do not see as being compatible, when in fact; used together they can be very useful.~~ `Last sentance is repetative` 

`Historical sociology is the combination of history and sociology which began in the 20th century. The blending of these two subjects enhaces the study and writing of history.`

It is very important to understand these two disciplines individually to better understand them ~~collectively~~`use different word other than collectively, maybe combined?`. ~~Historical sociology explains and describes social change.~~ `(put this later)` History ~~alone~~ is defined as the study of the past. Sociology is defined as the study of patterns of social change. `While` both disciplines have narratives that explain and describe `what do they explain and describe?` ~~, however, the difference~~ they differentiate on how ~~is~~ their **data is collected and which methods they implement** to create their narrative. ~~, which differs from discipline to discipline.~~ History~~, as a discipline,~~ creates a narrative through gathering facts, arranging them in chronological order and telling why a specific event matters to us today. Sociology~~, as a discipline,~~ follows the scientific method to test certain variables to understand patterns of social change. `How does historical sociology collect their data and what methods do they use? If you include historical sociology and define it you need to tie it back in at the end of the paragraph, or delete it entirely.`

`Defining history and sociology and their difference in methods and data collection.`

Sociology ~~can be~~ `is` seen as the “science of social change”. ~~The~~ `A` sociologist starts by making an observation on a certain social phenomena `starts what?`. A question is formed from this observation and a hypothesis is then formed `reword, reads funny, using formed twice is repeatitve--- A question and then hypothesis is formed from...`. This hypothesis ~~is a prediction that ~~then allows the sociologist ~~to test the hypothesis, or~~ to run an experiment. A conclusion is drawn and added to the narrative. `You're telling the scientific method, maybe just say that instead of going through each step and spend more time talking about what kind of social phenomenon they look at and why. I want to know more about that and what kind of questions they ask then the scientific method` Approaching the world through a scientific lens works for this discipline because in order to make huge claims about the way society works, data needs to be present `reword`. 

`Defining the scientific method within sociology. I broke up this paragraph to put data anaysis together.` 

The only way to get this data is to conduct experiments on society itself `is it the only way, or is it the best way or the most efficent way?`. Sociologists may collect data quantitatively or qualitatively, although most choose to use quantitative data because the numbers provide more concrete evidence when the sociologist is making their claim `why does this matter?, reword`. Quantitative methods aim to explain large changes across time. This **does not mean that qualitative methods should be separated from ~~this discipline~~ sociology.** Qualitative methods focus more on words than on numbers. For example, quantitative sociologists often conduct interviews where the exact words are later put into their sociological paper. Qualitative methods allow for the subjects to be represented by their own words instead of by numbers. This method is much more personal for the researcher ~~as well as the~~ `and` subject, and works best with smaller samples of people. Quantitative methods, on the other hand, works better with larger samples and are less personal for everyone involved. _It is not pertinent that these methods stay separate, and in fact many sociologists actually use both methods to create a more complete picture_. `put this sentance earlier, it gives the paragraph more meaning. Also re-read this paragraph out loud and try rewording most of this. It doesn't flow as smoothly as it could.`

`--The difference between quantitative data and qualitative data and the pro/cons of each`

Different schools of thought exist within sociology and often steer the type of research ~~the~~ `a` sociologist is doing `when you say THE sociologist it sounds like there is only one in the world; make sure you say A sociologist`. Symbolic interactionism is a school of thought that explains social behavior through the ways in which individuals interact with one another and the social institutions around them (school, work etc.). Functionalism is a school of thought that states society has pieces that all play a distinct role. Lastly, the conflict perspective views society as being in a continuous state of struggle between classes. Karl Marx is the scholar responsible for inventing conflict theory, and therefore is very important to conflict theorists in sociology `I have no idea why this is important or what the context to this is`. 

`--Three different types of sociological schools of thought?`

`Up to this point you've only mentioned sociology but you said earlier in your essay that you had to understand both history and sociology separately to understand historical sociology. You haven't mentioned history at all, so I'd rephrase earlier to say in order to understand historical sociology you have to understand sociology and then explain it. I'd also try to combine more of what sociology is and its methods to trim it down and talk more about the creation/foundation of historical sociology` 

Marx is an important figure to both sociologists and historians ~~and it is for this reason I am choosing to discuss him in this essay~~. Karl Marx’s writing during the ~~19th~~ `nineteenth` century focuses heavily on politics and class conflict. He strongly believe`d past tense` in chaos being the result of this class conflict. He also believe~~s~~`d past tense` that social patterns ~~are~~ `were` what lead to historical change. The fact that he discusse`d` **social issues in relation to historical and political change** show`ed` how these two disciplines can be ~~put together~~ `I'd use a different word, combined?`. Marx began the discipline that will eventually become known as Historical Sociology ~~sometime in~~ `during` the 1950s. 

`-- Breif synonopsis of Marxism. I don't see how this fits in your essay where you have it. Maybe move it somewhere else? or incorporate it somewhere else?` 

History is defined as the “study of the past” `you said this earlier Can you rephrase this?`. What does this mean? How should one study the past? Whereas sociology relies on data, history relies on evidence `what is the difference?`. The historian `again, same thing with THE sociologist, applies to THE historian as well` must gather evidence in which to base their narrative. ~~The  historian starts by researching a topic that interests them. The research aspect is very important for the historian and therefore must be done carefully and correctly. Next is the thesis statement, or argument, that the historian is trying to make. Good historical narratives have a good argument.~~ `I'd redo this whole paragraph. I think it's important to talk about a historians process, but I'd tried to make it either more detailed or engaging`

 `-- Defining history and how historians develop a thesis`
  `If you're going to define sociology and then define history, have the history section right after sociology and then talk about historical sociology. It will make the paper flow better.`
 

The ~~20th~~ `twentieth` century ~~sees~~ `saw/experienced` many wars and ~~leaves~~ `left` many individuals asking questions about how we~~, as a country,~~ _had gotten ourselves into such a mess_`rephrase`. Many historians ~~are~~ `were` expected to `help` make sense of it all `rephrase-- maybe make sense of the changes?` or somehow predict what will happen next. In the 1950s historians began looking for new methods to explain the societal change around them `Is this the only time we've done this? Rephrase`.   This becomes historical sociology, which both explains and describes a social change `Rephrase, maybe: what historians developed in response to the societal changes they had experierenced became known as historical sociology` (Greene, p.3127). Historical sociology differs from other historical disciplines `is discipline the right word choice?` in that it asks questions _that go against what we, as a society, think is concrete_ `this doesn't make sense`. What is truth… `don't all historians deal with this question?` This characteristic is very Marxist in nature `How is this Marxist? It doesn't go with what you've mentioned about Marx earlier in your paper`. When collecting data, it is important to record things `what things?` in the exact order they occurred (temporal order) and look at data across different time periods (longitudinal) `I don't understand what you're trying to say`. Being able to explain how society changes over time is important to this discipline as it provides evidence of the claim `what claim?`. This discipline focuses on actions both of individuals and groups `why?`. This characteristic is also very Marxist in nature `how?`. Lastly, The main focus of historical sociology is change within society `expand on this`. ~~The~~ `A` historical sociologist is responsible for mapping patterns of change `are they the only ones that do this? why are they the ones responsible?`.  

`-- Overview of historical sociology` 
`I think this paragraph has a lot of good information in it but you need to expand on all of it. I would want more information here and less about more of the detailed sociology information. Be detailed here, break up this paragraph ane expand what you're talking about, and cut down earlier because this is what you're essay is on`

The _nature_ `(word choice? maybe foundation?)` of historical sociology is focused on understanding how societies have formed throughout history and what patterns they follow. Historical sociologists study topics that center on **politics and their power dynamics.** ~~By this point I hope it is apparent why Marx is a huge influence to this discipline.~~ `Reword this or cut it out.` ~~His~~ Marx's obsession with ~~this~~ unequal distribution of power raise~~s~~`d` some very important questions that ~~call for~~ `require` more than just a simple historical narrative `What do you mean by simple historical narratives?`. These historical questions can only be answered through first understanding what is taking place in society and why `what historical questions? You haven't mentioned any examples yet`. This is why historical sociologists describe societal patterns in order to aid in their explanation of historical change. One perfect example of a historical sociology narrative comes from Theda Skocpol ~~and~~ `who` discusses what societal patterns lead to revolutions,  ~~(~~`an important example of` historical change~~)~~. 

`Importance of historical sociology, questions they ask, and an example.`
`I would expand on this paragraph more. Try and include more examples of historical sociology and why it matters. Also you talk about Theda in the next paragraph, maybe consider keeping her in one paragraph.`

Theda Skocpol is a female sociologist and political scientist who has written many books ranging in social topics. ~~She is currently a professor at Harvard University.~~ The four characteristics that Skocpol uses to explain historical sociology as a discipline are **1.** asking questions about social phenomenon that go against what we know **2.** longitudinal studies and temporal order matter **3.** actions and structures are what matter and **4.** focus patterns of change (Greene, p.3127). `Can you expand on this more? Reorder your paragraphs to have her explaination and then her work on revolutions`

`-- Background information on Skocpol and her characteristics of historical sociology`

In her 1997 book titled, **States & Social Revolutions**, Skocpol mentions that revolutions are socio-historical in that it takes great societal issues to arouse a revolution `You mention this earlier, how is this any different than what you said earlier?` (Greene, 3471). Skocpol begins with a hypothesis before she even begins the historical analysis. She does this because as she is focusing on agrarian bureaucracies, it is important to understand what societal issues are taking place between classes in order to explain why a revolution begins in the fist place. ` Reword this paragraph. Expand, more details, why does this matter?`

`-- Skocpol's book on revolutions` 

~~In conclusion, both history and sociology are disciplines that have established their place in the academic world separately, not collectively. Still a work in progress.~~ `This is the exact opposite of what your essay has been on. Why?`

`Overall when reading your paper I think that you should cut down on the technical aspects of sociology. I think that a lot of it, like the three schools of sociology doesn't add anything to your paper or to the understaning of historical sociology. I think that you should reorder your paragraphs to make them flow better. I think that you can really expand on historical sociology, its signficance, and why we should care about it. You have some really good parts, they just need to be fleshed out more. Also, refrain from "I hopes/I believe statements, because as Dr. Gibbs said in class either you did or you didn't so be assertive.`

FG: Lots of good descriptions and ideas scattered throughout, but it's hard to find a coherent thread / argument that holds everything together. Even after reading through it a few times, I'm unclear about your starting point and ending point: in other words--what do you assume to be true for your imagined reader in terms of understanding sociology and its relationship to history (ie do you think everyone assumes they are separate)?, and what do you want to change about them (ie show that history and sociology have to be considered together)? Once you get clear about what you're trying to do in the essay, I think you'll have a fairly easy time reorganizing.  
