## Professionalization and Leopold Von Ranke

  ~~Since Greco-Roman times, history was considered a subset of philosophy and literature.~~ History, on its own merit, was not conducted in a professional manner. ``What is a professional manner? Does the fact that history was a subset of philospohy and literature mean that it was not conducted in a professional member? I don't see how that first sentence fits in with the rest of the paragraph.`` Official chronologies were created, but actual historical narratives were regulated under the criticisms of rulers, theocracies, and even popular sentiment. But in mid-nineteenth century Germany, a professor at the University of Berlin would fundamentally change the way history is taught and applied. No individual contributed more to the evolution of historiography than Leopold Von Ranke, his historical methods become a mainstay on the modern college campus (Cheng, 2012, p. 92). Ranke’s application of the modern seminar system, peer review, source critique, and objectivity cumulated in what is considered the merging of the scientific approach with the historical approach, the **scientism** of history . As with all historical methods, there are downsides, including nationalism and even a tendency for historians to contradict themselves ``Does the practice of objective "professional" history conflict with nationalist history?``. Ranke was not immune to this weakness, either, preaching the necessity of nationalistic tendencies in historical works. **Despite his downfalls, Ranke's contributions to the field of history cannot be disregarded**. 

``In the mid-nineteenth 19th century, Ranke revolutionalized and professionalzed the modern historical profession by applying new scientific methods to ensure objectivity.  - I would try to make the first three sentences flow into the fourth third sentence "But in the mid-....," better. Your 4th and 5th sentences do a great job at providing a clear understanding of where this paper will go. After reading those sentences, I'm looking forward to reading the rest of the paper. `` 

  In the past ``Like Past as in 1960? Year 1? What time in the past are you referring to? You could say "Before the time of Ranke," or "Before the mid-nineteenth century".``, historians conducted their work as a hobby or as a section of literature or philosophy; the idea of being a historian on its own merit was absurd to most ``people`` in the academic atmosphere ``You might want to cite this``. Ranke bridged this gap through the application of scientific ~~methodology~~ methodologies ~~and~~ ``that`` brought the idea of history as an academic practice to fruition. Ranke’s scientific historiography focused on four main principles: objectivity and a rejection of moral lessons, trusting ``the`` ~~fact~~``facts`` over all else, seeing historical events for their uniqueness (divergence over similarity), and maintaining impartiality when referencing political works (Gil, 2009, p. 384-385).  If asked to sum this up, Ranke would declare that history is “documentary, not speculative” (Gil, 2009, p. 385)``Good sentence``. **To Ranke, any evidence that was not empirical should not be considered.** Historian Emile Benveniste articulated Ranke’s beliefs in this statement: “I wish I could annihilate my own self and only the objects would speak” (Maurer, 2006, p. 315). Ranke’s vision of a perfect historian entails a mere collection of sources, with no personal bias evident in their works. This is a stark contrast from previous historical works, and the first real alternative to the ancient standard that was set by Thucydides (Muir, 1987, p. 3). Beforehand, historians would still justify their writings with source material, but the shear level of empirical research that the **Rankean Method** requires is much more intensive than what was previously completed``Great explanation of his philosophy``. **Ranke’s shift required historians to be accountable for their narratives, who now had to back their work with real, empirical sources.** 

``Ranke's legacy forced modern historians to be more accountable to empirical evidence and objective methods. Ranke was guided by four main principals that led him to promote a more factual and objective history. - Great paragraph on what Ranke believed in. ``

  ``After orgininating in Germany``, the ~~The~~ professionalization of history ``movement`` soon``Soon? soon after Ranke developed his ideas? What year or time period did this occur?`` swept ``through`` the Western World. ~~but it originated in Germany.~~ This ~~is~~ ``was`` due to Ranke first applying his methodology to the University of Berlin ``Reword this sentence so it is in past tense. Also, you might want to make this second sentence the first one.`` (Torstendahl, 2014, p. 43).  Ranke was also the first historian to be recognized for his contributions as a professor, not merely as a historian (Popkin, 2016, p. 76). This led to the practice of historians becoming respected academic celebrities. The sheer popularity of future historians such as Michael Foucault can be attributed to Ranke making *the historian* a valued position in society ``You might want to give more "academic celebrity" examples other than Foucault``. `although Foucault is often crticized for not being a very good historian, despite his immense influence` While historians of the past certainly have achieved similar fame, it was never under the premise of modern academia ``Confusing. I am not sure what you are trying to say here``. 
  
 ``Ranke's success and fame in the academic profession had a trailblazing effect on future historians. - You might to revise and restructure this paragraph. `` 

  ``While`` Ranke preached a focus on objectivity, his “first demand is pure love of truth” (Ranke, 2010, p. 39). No other ideal should be more of a focus to a historian. `but haven't we complicated the idea of truth-seeking in history as an end in itself?` Before this *turn to scientism* “the skill of historians was… their linguistic forms… it ``[the historian]`` was guided by the principles of addressing an audience, by speaking to someone; it was indeed rhetorical” (Rüsen, 1990, p. 192). `don't forget about how important rhetoric was to roman historiographers` Rhetoric was a historian’s main contribution; their ability to captivate an audience of their goal, whether it be moral lessons or a political agenda, was paramount ``You might want to rewrite this sentence. It reads like a run-on sentence``. Ranke believed such work as crude and unprofessional, to him “such sentiments made history a branch of moral philosophy where rhetorical form and ethical maxims subordinated the pursuit of simple accuracy” ``Great sentence``(Muir, 1987, p. 4).  Ranke did not believe that historians should *judge the past* and make moral assumptions (Gil, 2009, p. 384; Popkin, 2016, p. 76). **By eliminating rhetoric in their works and embracing pure empiricism, historians believed they could achieve this *pure love of truth* that Ranke envisioned.**
  
 ``Ranke's passion for history revolved around his "pure love of truth." He believed that historians should not express their own opinions because their priority should be the persuit of truth. -Good Paragraph. ``

Only recognizing empirical evidence as acceptable source material ``,`` led Ranke to incorporate peer review in his classes. Peer review was conducted through Ranke’s **seminar system**. Before Ranke, history was taught primarily in lecture series. History students were given a narrative but had no instruction on how to create their own ``Please cite this``. Ranke saw this flaw in history education and created smaller, interpersonal classes where students sat in groups and subjected their works and opinions to criticism from fellow pupils. Sound familiar, historiography students ``It sounds very familiar!!! Funny``? Fellow historically-inclined peers now determined the success of a historical narrative, not the public or a ruling class ``Good point`` (Popkin, 2016, p. 79). **Historians saw this change as improving the objectivity of their job, as not having to adhere to these overbearing figure’s ideals would allow them to create history beyond the acceptability of the public.** ``You might to want to rewrite the phrase "these overbearing figure's ideals"  or Historians saw this change as improving the objectivity of not only history but their job. Ranke's methods allowed for historians to create a better history beyond than the one that a overbearing general public or ruling class would want.``

``Ranke introduced a the concept of "peer review"  which allowed for historians to adhere their works to academia and objectivity instead of outside forces. -You might to rewrite the last paragraph.  ``

  Proliferation of history as an academic pursuit formed a stark shift in how historical writing was conducted.  While previous historians often looked for *absolute truth* or relied on religious or philosophical *certainties*, historians under Ranke knew that to achieve truth, it meant “not only establishing the facts as correctly as possible, but also placing them in their cotemporary context in such a way that the past would come to life again” (Gilbert, 1987, p. 394). German historian Friedrich Meinecke believed that this line of thinking would put all of history in a new perspective, as the “outcome of events is not determined by general laws that human beings cannot alter” (Popkin, 2016, p. 69). ``You might to shorten the first three sentences. They seem like fluff.`` **The legitimacy of historical work conducted in the past was put into question, as religious or moral lessons found in past historical works certainly breached the ideal of objectivity.** This uneasiness in relying on past sources``Confusing phrase. Do you mean this uneasiness with previous historical works before Ranke?`` created an environment where “the entire history of the past suddenly cried out to be rewritten” (Popkin, 2016, p. 76). British Conservative Edmund Burke believed that these past histories should still be respected, as they are a “better guide for the present than rational maxims” (Popkin, 2016, p. 72). While many ``Many? This word is pretty vague. You might want to say "While individuals/historians like Burke may still..."`` still cite the greats such as Herodotus or Polybius, their motives and bias must be called to question. **Many ``Please change the word "Many"`` historians still respect their traditions and acknowledge these past works but have garnered a healthy amount of skepticism when it comes to reliability of sources.** ``This sentence is very clunky. It is not entirely clear what you have are trying to say.``
  
  `` Despite Ranke's movement to promote scientific objective historical practices, there were some historians who did not adhere to Ranke's approch.  - This sentence should be at the beginning of the paper. You have mentioned how different Ranke's methods were before in the first few paragraphs. Why not add to the point you made in the second to last sentence? you should make an argument here. It would add to the strength of the paper.`` 

  Professionalization meant that there were more individuals proclaiming to be historians than ever before. There was now a group of like-minded peers who shared in the same pursuits, occupied similar positions in society, and conceptualized the identical limitations in their work. These individuals created a “new sense of collective identity soon led to the formation of a professional organization whose function was to define a common standard of occupational conduct” (Hamerow, 1986, p. 320). Due to this, many ``individuals? groups? Ranke inspired organizations`` came into fruition and at the forefront of academic standardization, such as the United States *American Historical Review*. **These organizations set high standards for academic historical work, putting increasing emphasis on source material.** This new concern for sources led to a revolution in how documents are preserved and accounted for. ``Great two sentences back to back. They do a great job of explaining the point of the paragraph``. Professional archives exploded in popularity, giving historians a much larger pool of sources to draw from (Popkin, 2016, p. 80). The *American Historical Reviews* first editor (and the first student to complete a Ph.D. in history at Johns Hopkins University) was J. Franklin Jameson, who played a crucial role in “the professionalization of history by using the journal to establish uniform standards of scholarship” (Cheng, 2012, p. 96). Citing factual accuracy, Jameson build upon Ranke’s approach, adding that while historians should attempt to be objective, they could never truly be. This idea ``was or would later be``~~will be~~ expanded upon in the 20th century, with the Annales School of thought and other historians ~~believing~~ ``that believed`` Ranke’s ideals to be naïve and impossible to achieve. ``Watch your tenses. Make sure you are writing in the correct tense.``

`` The professionalization of history had a profound impact on the history profession. New historical organizations formed due to the influence of Ranke's historical methods. -I like how you are building on Ranke's Legacy. This paragraph does an excellent job on telling us why Ranke was significant to the study of history. ``

  As with any approach to history, there are drawbacks to Ranke’s methods. In the seminar classroom, oral histories were discredited as unreliable due to a lack of empirical evidence ``Please cite this``. While historians often only wrote of their own country in this nationalistic period, this ``trend`` only gave credit to the notion of non-empirical history (read: non-western history) being unreliable at best. The common ideal of the era was that historians should be non-biased in their work ``Key point``. As seen in later chapters of this book, the modern consensus is that this is impossible ``Please Cite this before the end of the project``. ~~The process in which one chooses sources is inherently subjective~~ ``You say the same thing in the next sentence`` (Iggers, *Historiography in the 20th century*, 2005, p. 470). **The action of picking sources automatically raises bias in a narrative, as choosing to include or exclude any source is an act of subjectivity.**  Another negative aspect of professionalization was that generally only white males were accepted into history programs at universities ``Was this due to professionalization? Or had "only white males" been the main demographic of historians before the time of Ranke? Correlation does not equal causation. Saying that "after the professionalization of history, the history profession remained a white male dominated and non-diverse field." And "Professionalization lead to more the history profession being a more white male dominated field." These are two very different statements and I am not sure which one you are trying to say here.``. **History continued to be male dominated and Caucasian-centric endeavor** (as it had always been). For decades “female historians were barred from publishing in major journals… as were African-American authors in the American Historical Review” ~~that was mentioned previously~~ ``No need to say this. The grammatic structure of that phrase implies that you mentioned female and African American Historians in the American Historical earlier. I know that this was not what you were trying to say.`` (Lingelbach, 2011, p. 85). For more information on this topic concerning gender, please see the section about gender pre-20th century. ``Nice shoutout to gender studies. I like how you are incoporating other historigraphic topics in your paper. You should make more attempts to do add other class topics before you turn in your final draft. ``
  
  ``While Ranke's methods had its benefits, many negative trends continued after the professionalization of history such as an abundance of nationalist history, a lack of gender history/historians and the absence of minorities in the historical profession. - This paragraph should be cleaned up so it can flow better. `` 

  Focusing on objectiveness tended to rely on political source material `` Was objectivity the reason for reliance on political source material or the followers of Ranke's trend? Not sure which argument you are trying to make. `` . While Ranke did not discredit social and economic factors, “in his works, they were seen and located in the framework of a political history``"`` ``Great point``  (Gil, 2009, p. 385). Naturally``,`` it makes sense to use the most credited sources, but a focus on political documents “singled out documents that were generated primarily by the states” (Iggers, *Historiography in the 20th century*, 2005, p. 470). This was a contributing factor to the rise in nationalism in the 19th and early 20th century, as if all history being taught was political,``.`` **~~then~~ ``Due to this trend,`` the modern political system ``utilized`` ~~would no doubt utilize~~ historians as propaganda machines, ~~as many were~~ during World War I/II, and even into the Cold War.** ``Terrifying``
  
  ``Ranke's objective history had a large focus on political history which led to the an alienation of social and economic history. Ranke's historical methods were later utilized by political figures to promote "proganda machines" in the 20th century. - My comment are designed to make you more precise with your langugage. If you are writing exactly what you are trying to argue, that's great! It just was not entirely clear to me. ``

  Another dangerous result of applying scientific methodology to history was the rise of narratives concerning racial purity and eugenics. These “racial explanations were frequently advanced to justify historical developments such as European imperial conquests in the rest of the world, the westward expansion of the United States, and slavery and segregation in the American South” (Popkin, 2016, p. 88). This became a rampant feature of this time, which coupled with nationalist ideals to a devastating effect in the late 19th and early 20th century. Even though Ranke vehemently opposed the concept of a *total* or *grand* narrative that encompasses all of humanity, **he was often guilty of constructing these overarching narratives anyway** `` Please elaborate and go in to greater detail on why. This is fascinating. ``(Gibbs, Lecture, 2/7/2018).  `this is an idea from our Ranke readings--it would be better to cite them on this point` This highlights a reoccurring theme during this period, the hypocrisy of the Rankean historian. 

``Ranke's professionalization of history movement was often used for racist historical works. -Very interesting. I would love to see this paragraph expanded. You make a lot of bold points in this paragraph that would be better served through more details. ``

  Proliferation of nationalist historical works during this time can be attributed to the overall rising nationalist tendencies in the Western World, **but also to the newly academic setting of history providing an avenue to partake in such narratives `` This sentence might flow better with your overall paper if you added Ranke to it``** Gerniversities pushed nationalist narratives in their classrooms, due to the formation of the unified Germanic state that occurred during this time (Popkin, 2016, p. 70). Even Ranke contributed to German nationalism in his works, betraying his ideal of objectivity. Ranke asserted that “above all, [history] should benefit the nation to which we long and without which our studies would not even exist” ``WOW!``  (Ranke, 2010, p.59). This certainly goes against his ideals of objectivity. Some even questioned his reasonings for adhering to *pure truth*. Georg G Iggers, a historian known for his work on historiography and Ranke specifically, believed that “this ideal of objectivity had been merely an outgrowth of the German ruling classes, with which Ranke was affiliated, directed at consolidating their position” (Iggers, *The Image of Ranke in American and German Historical Thought*, 1962, p. 25). 
  
  `` ``

  While it came with its own faults and was quickly criticized by the next generation of historians, Leopold Von Ranke and his methods paved the way for professionalism in history and allowed these historians an avenue to have their passion become a seriously considered profession. No individual had a greater impact on making history an academic pursuit more than Ranke. No name is more associated with the “scientific” turn of history. **Ranke knew the importance of distinguishing history and fiction and set out clear guidelines that professionalized how history is conducted.**
  
  `` ``
  
 FG: Elena is writing on the intellectual status of history, which will be a good prequel to your essay, but you should still do more to describe the "standard" methods of history and historiography prior to Ranke. This will make it easier to show how what he's doing is both continuous and discontinuous--something I hope you'll elaborate more on. After you do some tighenting in your prose, you'll have a very excellent description of Ranke and his program. So definitely focus more on the bigger picture from here out--both history before Ranke (but not too much on intellectual status), and his enduring legacy even in a postmodern world.
