# Revolutionary Marxism
Marx was a true revolutionary. His theory of "historical realization of freedom" and the theory of historical materialism was revolutionary. At the center of *human freedom* are economic factors. At the center of historical materialism lie the production of needs. Marx  at history through the lens of "*reconciliation with nature*" and that is only achievable once we are not laboring for the basic improvement of our lives (Rockmore, p. 493). *Humans make history*, but **do not** make nature. Since only the creator (us) knows the creation (history), we can only reconstruct it within our mind. If our goal in life is to meet our needs through labor, our economic status plays a role in every aspect of our lives and our economic status arises out of our material existence. 

This was a new way of thinking about humanity and history. History is formed through the **social classes** and **hierarchy**, so therefore *human agency* is a key factor in the making of history (Green and Troup, p. 36). The oppressed have to be *aware* of their oppression. Marxism encourages the belief that socio-economic status (the *bourgeoisie* and *proletariat*) forges history. Men do not make history as they want, but "under circumstances existing already, given and transmitted from the past" (Popkin, p. 89). This was revolutionary due to the **focus** on human activity, showing we forge our paths **within** history. Since agency is important in the development of classes and institutions, we are all producers of our own history. 

One's economic status both creates our **present history** and our **past history**, and the distinction between capitalism and communism within our societies forges our economic status. In this sense, Marxism plays a role in the way we perceive our realities, and therefore our histories. As we are forged as a product of our environment, so our histories become as well. We all know that in our past, history was written down with an agenda in mind. The elite usually had control of the histories that were written, and kept oppressed voices removed from the narrative that was produced. There are histories written from an elitist perspective, as only the elite were literate. This corruption was evident during the Renaissance, as Machiavelli was banished for going against the Medici rulers of Florence. 

Renaissance humanism falls in favor of Marxism as it places emphasis on the human part of history. The humanist movement in medieval Europe rose from religious oppression and growing secularization. This was one of the first huge revolutions in favor of the individual. While Marx's view of history focuses on human awareness, the individual is not forsaken from the whole. This proves the uniqueness of Marxism and the importance of our individual role within society. History is not only made by men, it is ever-revolving as we create new ways of influencing not only the present, but the future as well. 





