I.	While reading the Tom Rockmore piece, it states on page 489, "Engles, who was interested in the science of his day, is close to what today would be called positivism. Like the positivists of the Vienna Circle, he thought that knowledge of all kinds can and must be formulated as scientific law. He recommends substituting science, which yields truth, for philosophy, which yields only mythological and finally mistaken views." Was Marxist approach to history, history? Or does it resemble more philosophical disciplines than historical disciplines? What would come from removing science and replacing it with philosophy in historical study and writing?

II.	On page 492, Rockmore discussed Marx's ideas of history and freedom, where he stated, "Marx, more than Hegel, interprets freedom as a function of the development of the economy. He sees the need to liberate individuals from the economic yoke of modern industrial society, in a word to bring about a post-economic realm of freedoms, in order to develop their capacities in ways unconnected with economics." Is freedom a function of economic development in today's world? Does the economy really influence or even place restrictions on our freedoms today?

III.	"For Marx, the rest of society - the superstructure of political institutions and legal systems - was derived from the forces and relations of production. In other words, he does not ascribe an independent existence to the realm of human consciousness and ideas, but perceives these as arising out of our material existence" (Houses, p. 35). Is history based in the material aspects of the world? Does history of humanity depend upon the materials in the world, why? Do we still find ourselves rising "out of our material existence"?

IV.	On page 38 of Houses, it states, "During the 1960s and 1970s labour historians were polarized around a debate over the degree to which people of the working class have been able to act as agents in the making of their own history". Have working classes ever been able to contribute to making their history? Why would working classes have been left out of being able to make their own history during the time?

V.	"And in many towns the actual nucleus from which the labour movement derived ideas, organisation, and leadership, was made up of such men as shoe-makers, weavers, saddlers and harnessmakers, booksellers, printers, building workers, small tradesmen, and the like. The vast area of Radical London between 1815 and 1850 drew its strength from no major heavy industries (shipbuilding was tending to decline, and the engineers only made their impact later in the century) but from the host of smaller trades and occupations" (Houses, p. 48). Was this the chance for the working-class to "make their own history"? Was the working-class really pushing for change, or was someone trying to call them to action by reaching out to them with the labour movement? 
