# Historiography & Sociology
The principle difference between history and sociology is their theoretical applicability. History by nature is the study of how humans have interacted and lived throughout the past and therefor relies on concrete situations for its study. The theoretical side of history arises when speculating on why something occurred or what its true nature was. Sociology on the other hand studies human organization and group psychology on a more macro scale and therefor is able to be applied in completely theoretic models. The weakness of history lies in its rigidity which often becomes so mired in being objectively factual that it refuses to speculate on anything even when such postulations could be useful in understanding an event while not detracting from the accuracy of the piece. The weakness of Sociology is its inability to be definitive especially working in a historical context, for example you can test models and theories about why you believe the economic systems of the Kiowa and Miami cultures developed differently but its difficult to assert a large degree of certainty. Sociology also often fails to account for the randomness of human agency, while patterns surely exist within history due to the fact that humans inherently all share key characteristics there are also times in which it is impossible to pinpoint a catalyst or concrete motivation for an occurrence due to how unpredictable and irrational humans can be, it can be argued that hypocrisy and irrationality are as quintessential to being a human as the enjoyment of good food or the need for sleep. "Historical sociology addresses directly the distinction between explanations based on structure and those based on agency. This is an issue at the core of controversy among most historical theorists as well as central to ordering historical writing." (Green 110) History is the study of humanity's past and therefor sociology could not exist without the basis of history to analyze for its data. If historical data was not collected or arranged sociological modeling would be impossible. The advantage of combining the two is that sociology combs through the often disparate pile of historical analysis and attempts to find concrete patterns which give historical research its relevance to the present and future. Historians like Theda Skocpol do this well in their study of the Chinese, French and Russian revolutions and comparing them to both failed rebellions and revolutions that occurred without the use of force such as the cultural revolution of Japan. This work is critical to orient these events within a larger narrative of history and to point out that humans do often operate on a cyclical and predictable basis despite being in entirely different scenarios. Where the synthesis of historiography and sociology becomes quite useful is not only in analyzing the similarities that enabled differing events but in the ability to zoom in on the particular roots of each circumstance which will almost always vary even if the outcome is similar to another event. Skocpol outlines this in her fourth principal of historical sociology "They highlight the particular and varying features of specific kinds of social structures and patterns of change". This principle highlights the critical balance that the disciplines provide each other when synthesized. Sociology makes a historian think in larger terms and study human behavior as a whole this protects the historian from just merely cataloguing events as they occur with no insight into why they are occurring or what could possibly come next. History protects sociology in that it re anchors the discipline in humanity and forces it to account for minutia when examining the causes and relationships of events as well as allows for the agency of human beings and the unpredictable nature of the world to be taken into account as variables. Sociology is what provides relevance to historians in the present time, it is impossible to speculate on the future and to relate the past to the present in a meaningful way if you are just recording the past and view history as merely events playing out in an unconnected and entirely individual manor, and thus sociology slays the beast of objectivism. Sociology also protects against historical delusions such as the enlightenment ideal that humans are "progressing" in a linear manner always moving forward to a more ideal future. The criticisms of Weber's postulations about 3rd world nations eventually working towards emulating American capitalism and democracy is a example of this. (Green 113) Sociology allows a historian to de-orient themselves from their national identity which sub consciously colors their ideas about how cycles play out. It enables historians like Skocpol to analyze 3 different revolutions and what made them each possible and apply the lessons of 3 very different nations to the larger world in general. Thus through sociology someone could realistically postulate on scenarios where the United States descended into revolution which is something that would seem impossible to many American historians like Weber who emulate the view of Roman historians that their nation is permanent and the finality of an ideal in which other nations are constantly striving to replicate. In summation each discipline melds together so seamlessly that many historians do not see a difference between the two. Combining them is so obvious that modern historical method doesn’t even have to think when employing them in tandem. As stated earlier each methodology protects the other from going too far with its assertions and enables one to simultaneously employ a micro and macroscopic view to history and society. They each also dispel delusions which come from the inevitable bias and solipsism that come from a human being simultaneously trying to ponder and take into account events which they had no part in while also forming a world view based on what they have observed. Thus someone whose lived in a society that has not come close to collapsing can understand their position in history is more precarious than their experience has shown them due to the reality faced by other nations such as the Somali empire whose rise and fall is able to modeled thanks to combining the work of historians and historical narrative with the computing and modeling sciences used in Sociology.
