## SOCIOLOGY
Desiree' Martinez
##### Houses, “Historical sociology”, 110-140

 Sociology and History are not different because without understanding the _reasons_ why people desire for _more_ and the _scaling_ that is necessary to get there, there would be no history. Therefore, "social" is the dynamics of the peoples and "history" is the aim of understanding those social dynamics and their significance. Hence, you cannot have one without the other. As argued by Mann,"historical change occurs as humans in pursuit of their goals form social networks, which coalesce into the **four spheres**: social power, ideological, economic, military, and political relationships."(Houses p.114) Thus, it could be understood that history has always been expressed and understood through one of these four spheres. Though historians did not have the means or knowledge to explicitly understand these spheres until the modern centuries, at least one or more of the spheres were always present in historical writing. 
 
 The first histories by Herodotus and Thucydides, attempted to, "discover and transmit the truth about bygone events." (FHTH p.27) Though focus most times was on the "greatness" of fellow countrymen, they no less attempted to **transmit** the social, economic, and political relationships that were motives for building their city-state through their stories. Through these narratives we can understand where "social" dynamics and economics are formulated into power.
 
 In regards to Medievial history, though knowledge digressed, social and economic value was still present. Those who were in line with the **rhetoric** of the time (Church) saw advancement and those who were not were in peril. Thus, medievial history's atttempt, "was to present the truth that would convince their readers of appropriate moral and religious lessons" and oftened used antiquarian figures in their history to legitemize and justify social and political agency. (FHTH p. 39) Therefore, annals and chronicles developed out of the need to keep politics and economics in line= ideological sphere. 
 
 In the Enlightenment Era we can see that **individual vs collective agency** begins to take form. Reason and question is now invoked into all four spheres. As articulated by Lorenzo Valla, reason could now question long-established traditions. (FHTH p. 49)  Social, political, and economic factors can now raise the individual not the institution thus, preluding to Marxism. The clear economic distinctions of "us vs them" is viewed in writings like Machiavelli and the affects it has on social standings is further propelled in the centuries to come. 
 
 Thus, this is where modern histories build upon. Where Croe's idea that "History is in historians minds" is not merely just words but an active dynamic. The progression of Ranke, Braudel, and Marx bridge the four spheres into a "total" understanding (**Social History**) of history and why revolutions shake the foundations of previous schools of thought. History is not just social nor is just written accounts but is truly a web of all things that make humans human. 

10: very thorough historical examples! although i'm still not exactly what you were trying to show or argue in your comment--make sure there is a clear statement of purpose. to your first sentence, i think we have to say that history and sociology are indeed different when it comes to methods, kinds of sources, etc, but you make an excellent point that social systems are becoming increasingly important for historical study. but is this doing history through a social lens or sociology per se? 
