# Historical Sociology 
History and sociology are different in their methodologies, but neither of them can exist without the other.  History looks at "cultural significance" whereas sociology looks at "rules or patterns of social events" and (Green & Troup, p. 112). Both look for the truth within the human experience. History and sociology both look at society, as it is impossible to ascertain "culture" without "rules or patterns". This is an important distinction. Culture specifies a rule and pattern, and human experience relies on culture. While history and sociology are *distinct* in  practice, it is hard to **completely** remove one from the other. 

 History provides a "*multiplicity of possible evidence*" to substantiate an specific type of rationality within it (Green & Troup, p. 113). Sociology utilizes societal stratification and institutional structures, looking at the general human reality. It also looks at the world *generally* while history is usually *specific*. Marxism within history looks primarily at economic developments, and while important, a full history cannot be made just by looking strictly at economic and political factors (Popkin, p. 88).  History's weaknesses comes from the fact it focuses on the past; how can we measure cultural significance while not being truly present within that culture? While history aims to answer that question, sociology searches for the pattern of cultural significance within both the past and present. 
 
While both sociology and history are considered records of significance, both can be subject to bias. While sociology seeks to answer questions for the future, history wants to use the past to reveal individuals' influence on the present. In this sense, one cannot exist alongside the other without having some similar viewpoints. Historians utilize story-telling to explain *why* something happened within the human experience, which cannot be examined without looking at the past culture and society. It cannot be analyzed without looking at past biases, social institutions and strutures, and reasons *why* this may or may not have happened because of *x, y, z*. 

 The excerpt *France, Russia, China: A Structural Analysis of Social Revolutions* by Theda Skocpol considers technicalities between state elites and regionally based social networks. In preindustrial states, monarchs struggled to balance the between fully developed bureucracy on one hand and resources for wars, culture, and court life on the other (Skocpol, p. 131). Sociologists would analyze the burercracy, while Marxist historians would look at the economic factors within the bourgeoisie elite. Historians that do not prescribe to Marxism would focus on the way in which one gathered resources for war. As one can see, sociology does not differ that drastically from history because while they use different methods, they are ultimately searching for the same *kind* of fundamental truth. 
 
