Elena Farmin

*Houses*, “Historical sociology,” p. 110-140

Max Weber stated that “sociology [formulates] models or types and general rules or patterns of social events, whereas history ‘aims at the causal analysis and causal attribution of individual actions, structures and personalities that have cultural significance’” (*Houses*, p. 112). In other words, sociology focuses on human society while history seeks to create a bigger picture of humanity throughout the ages. 


History and sociology have their fair share of strengths and weaknesses. History can examine events and figures through the lens of various disciplines, but cannot always be viewed as an objective truth. Sociology can provide insight into past and present societies, but certain patterns might not apply to all societies in all time periods. Some patterns might even be missing some crucial factors. Theda Skocpol criticized Immanuel Wallerstein’s *The Modern World-System* for being “[l]ike many other important pioneering works, … [overreaching] itself and [falling] short of its aims” (*Houses*, p. 115). In her book, *France, Russia, China: A Structural Analysis of Social Revolutions*, Skocpol criticized “social scientists” in general for their “avoidance … of the specific problem of social revolution” (*Houses*, p. 122). Instead of examining revolutions as major events that have forever changed historical thought and events (specifically the revolutions in the the three countries of the title), sociologists had instead focused on specific behaviors behind revolutions. The book sought to provide a sociological perspective on revolutions while also incorporating it into the bigger picture of an historical analysis.


While each discipline differs in focus and age (history, in the written sense, dates back to classical antiquity while sociology traces its roots to the mid-nineteenth century), they are not incompatible systems. It is doubtful that there would be a subfield called historical sociology if that were case. Sociology is in a sense a child of history, since it sprang from Auguste Comte’s belief that “scholarship about the past [should] model itself on the procedures of the natural sciences” (Popkin, p. 87). Both disciplines are also built upon the “importance of evidence” (*Houses*, p. 113). The first page of the chapter states how counterintuitive it is that “the historical profession [does not] welcome the insights of historical sociology” (*Houses*, p. 110). Not to say that all historians should be expert sociologists, but an understanding of sociology should help a historian to better understand past societies and how they developed into present-day societies. Such an understanding can allow for a greater historical narrative. Also, sociologists would not have knowledge of past societies were it not for historical records and commentaries. In those respects, history and sociology are inextricably linked.
