### Sociology v. History
#### Houses, pg. 110 - 140
History and sociology are markedly connected, but have one radical difference: history sees the importance in individual events throughout history to furthering change, while sociology looks at the society as a whole, seeing change in the larger institutions. Because of this, sociology *could not exist* without history. History is a necessary arm of sociology, as sociologists derive theories about human behavior from studying history surrounding human behavior (Green and Troup, pg. 112). Creating a theory about a society without studying the history about that society in depth does not make for a very good theory. The large societal trends that sociologists purport to discover can only go so far if the evidence does not back them up, which is where the careful study of history can be a very helpful tool. 

History can find its strength within individual actors, whose actions grow out of the institutions that they are living in, and all contribute to the constant march forward of history. Sociology, on the other hand, does not see individuals, only the great social structures that are the main change agents. While both have their strengths, sociology cannot exist without history. Sociology looks at important changes within societies as a whole, but it could not see these without the historical evidence to back it up. Without the record of changes throughout history, sociology has no larger societal trends to base its theories upon. This can best be seen within Skocpol's work on social revolutions. 

Skocpol’s influential work surrounding the Russian, French, and Chinese, revolutions was extensively historical researched. Skocpol read the histories of all three nations, trying to get a complete view of the three societies before she looked at the revolutions themselves (Green and Troup, pg. 118). Skocpol was able to create a work that analyzed the change in the larger institutions within society that lead to revolution, while drawing from histories that illustrated the actions of the individuals that would lead to the change necessary to bring about a revolution. *France, Russia, and China: A Structural Analysis of Social Revolutions* uses a very unique way of intertwining history and sociology. Using history to back up larger, sociological claims, has been done before, but not to this extent. Still, through the combination of history and sociology, the differences between them are accentuated. If there is a lack of history, then there is a lack of sociology. Forever dependent upon history, sociology will only grow as history grows. 

7: nicely said, but very few citations to the sociology readings, and none to previous readings that can help make a stronger historiographical argument. you are, however, right on about the general vs specific natures of each discpline. 
