### Emily Delcoure
# Historical Sociology

History is necessary in an audience's understanding of sociological writings, but they are inherently different because of sociologists' ability to reach conclusions using **scientific data** almost exclusively (Green and Troup, p. 117-18). While this is the main difference this is not the only distinction between the two disciplines, because they are just that: *two separate dsciplines*. Another of these differences is the basic, core, **intent of writings** within each discipline. In history the intent is *to tell the stories* of the past, to better understand why humans have come to be the way they are (Popkin, p. 109). Inversely, in sociology their core intent is to *know the truth* of the stories history and historians might leave out (Green and Troup, p. 111). In this way the *strength* of one discipline is the *weakness* of the other, and vice versa.

It is **entirely possible** to combine these two subjects, to an extent, as there have been many a sociologist, historian, and/or social historian, to use these methodologies in conjunction with one another. These historians, and sociologists, include but are not limited to: Karl Marx, Friedrich Engels, Max Weber, Immanuel Wallerstein, Charles Tilly, and Theda Skocpol (Green and Troup, p. 111, 114, 117). This group of people employed many "sociological" measurements and research methods (*class struggle, economics, culture, development of certain behaviors, etc.*) on a history that had previous only been categorized by political, religious, or national indicators and standards (Green and Troup, 110-118). In many ways, although not interchagable, history and sociology in the modern intellectual world are inseparable. This is especially true when considering the four main tenants of historical sociology outlined in *Houses of History*, and the main intentions of "academic history" as it was formed in the nineteenth century (Green and Troup, p. 110; Popkin, p. 68).

7: not quite minimum length (300 words instead of 400). although you list a number of people who have supposedly contributed to combining the two subjects, you don't analyze very closely, or give examples, of whether or not they actually combine different fields as you claim is possible. You have many excellent ideas about the relationship b/w the fields (separate, but inseparable), that should be more rigorously argued and supported by readings rather than simply stated.
