  Since Auguste Comte coined the term "Sociology" in the mid-nineteenth century, the field has become prominent in the way scholars are studying the social world. The explanations Sociologists sought to uncover had traditionally been answered by the work of Historians. The crucial difference that would emerge and sperate these two fields would be the methodology in their respective approaches. Sociologists were interested in the processes and patterns of individual and group actions, whereas Historians were interested in the causes and significance of these actions and events.

  Max Weber viewed Sociology and History as connected yet sperate entities, whereas Sociology formulated models, types, patterns, and general rules of social events and History analyzed these events with a causal focus and sought to determine the cultural significance (houses p.112). This notion asserts that Sociologists are focused on measurable and testable theoretical explanations of human actions. This is a stark contrast to the model of History established by Ranke that asserted the main utility and approach for the Historian is “to show what actually happened” and focused on the research and analysis of primary sources. (HtoH-Net p.76). 
	
  This primary difference of approach and focus is what separates these two fields and their inherent thesis.  As Weber asserted, Sociology and History are intertwined in explaining the human story, even if they are not interchangeable. They both serve their own utility and are effective at offering explanations in the voids left in the approach of the other. Green and Troup explain effectively that “theory in social science should concern itself only with the general phenomena; the ‘unique’ should be relegated to the ‘narrative historians’.”(houses p.123)
  
7: very nicely stated differences b/w the fields, but far too little reference to previous readings to make a historiographical argument about their relationship. that was a a key component of the assignment.
