## History and Sociology

**History is the study of the past** and how it has influenced current events and informed people's view of the past. **Sociology is the study of changes in society** and how people interact, both as individuals and groups. The reason people make decisions in the present and how they change over time. History and sociology are different but they can be used together to achieve important and interesting studies that would not working using only one discipline. Some of the most influential sociologists such as Max Weber studied topics using sociology that are very important for the conclusions historians make. For example *"Weber was interested in the meanings of action for an individual, and [...] how the subjective world affected or even helped to implement societal change* **(Green and Troup. 112)**. And while, Weber did a good job of using evidence to back of his claims **(Green and Troup. 113)**. One of the weaknesses of sociology is that there needs to be context for the changes in society and to fully understand the importance of why people and society evolved. Yet history can focus and rely to much on the evidence, and as a result become too detailed. *The strengths of history is its ability to see both the large picture as society changes over hundreds of years and whole continents to histories that look at a single town, family, object, or person.*

Before reading Theda Skocpol's work I would have likely said that history and sociology were incompatible based on my own views of history. But after reading *France, Russia, China: A Structural Analysis of Social Revolutions* I have changed my view. If history and sociology are used in ways that allow for both a historical perspective that is focused on the historical implications and a sociology look at changes in society and what caused them. It is a very valuable way of looking at history and society in general. Skocpol does a wonderful job of using sociology look at the events leading up to the revolutions in both France and Russia. She begins by setting up how each society works. Explaining how the economics of each region, what the current living conditions were and if the military were likely to support or fight an uprising by the people **(Green and Troup. 125, 130-131)**.  

Overall, history and sociology can be compatible if the person using both is careful to utilize each based on their strengths.
