Academic development of humanities tenn to center on the premise of historical examination. Specifically History and Sociology attempt to develop an objective center of knowledge on human behavior using evidence taken from the past. But, the end goals of both studies diverge on the ultimate purpose of the research each produce. **Plainly, Sociology focuses on a functionalist application of history to modern problems/society while professional history provides a strict review of history with the purpose of formalizing a narrative message of humanity.** *The shared goal of both professions lies in their pursuit to use the past in a objective manner to draw necessary “truths” from their sources.*

The origins of Sociology extend from historical writers like Marx and Max Weber who began to develop a conscious analyses of both the past and present. The difference in scholarship arose in the end purpose presented by the analysists as *Weber and Marx used the past to develop conscious social theory of human behavior.*(Houses.P.112) Historians had long since varied on the approach to human behavior that examined a collective total of past agents that would cause change in civilization. **On a larger scale history examined a holistic approach to the human narrative while sociology focused more on creating specific analogs in society to build theory on human change.** (Houses.P.112-13).  *Sociology follows the function to examine a modern world and the causation of its social status quo*. At its core history as academia has never sought to explain laws of human behavior. Instead history is the examination of our past that gives a critical skills and information in the pursuit to find a cohesive truth to our past. 

**The reality that history as a scholastic focus is not pursuant to development of social laws themselves creates a tangible divide to sociology.** Formative modern historical work created by Leopold Ranke or the Annnales School sought to create a legitimate system of scientific history yet were ultimately futile as we are forced to accept that *history as an end is less static.* The intrinsic value placed in Rankian history was notable in the 20th century wars; histories of Europe were now tied to a collective identity of Europe (Popkins.P.98). History’s purpose was as a tool to unite groups through common heritage.  The Annales schools craft evolved from Rankian tradtion forming a collective narrative of human progress.  Fernand Braudel of the Annales relied on comparative narrative elements within his genre instead hoping to create a collective view of independent cultures (Houses.P.90).  It should be understood that no academic pursuit is intrinsically more valuable than the other as *both expand a collective understanding of human motivation.* It is important to find patterns apply them wisely now and both Historians and Sociologists gain tremendously by the work both fields accomplish. 
