***A More Complete Picture: History v. Sociology***

**Updated**

The study of history consists of various fields, disciplines and specializations that **go far beyond sociology’s limited scope. History often looks at individual leaders and ideologies** instead of only seeing through sociology’s lens of class conflict and societal institutions. However, those lenses can overlap with historians such as Karl Marx (Green, 47). Historians, such as Machiavelli in the 15th and 16th century Renaissance period, have examined the decisions, ambitions and legacy of historical leaders like Alexander (Machiavelli, 19). Instead of analyzing the institution framework that restricted Alexander, Machiavelli was able to explain why Alexander’s personality and decisions shaped the course of history. Even important historical figures such as Julius Caesar have used their own stories and accounts to alter the study of history itself. Caesar’s “Gallic Wars” book proved to “established a precedent for memoirs written by military and political leaders to describe their own accomplishments" (Popkin, 33). **The contributions of individual figures are analyzed in historical studies while sociology would brush it off as an extension of a bigger social institution.**

Sociologists complete a fervent study of the classes and societal institutions that impact a country. In Skocpol’s historical work about historical sociology, he focuses on France's, China's and Russia's class structure and societal institutions (court system, military framework, economic system and power structure) to provide reasoning for each country’s “social revolution” (Green, 144). As the two historians, Sewell and Stone, correctly point out, Skocpol’s study of historical sociology does not provide a sufficient explanation of the ideologies surrounding the “social revolutions” he covers (Green, 138). **At no point did Skocpol elaborate on the ideologies that drove those revolutions.** A proper historical work would have covered how the revolutionaries used their beliefs of liberty and equality to support the French Revolution and how Russian and Chinese revolutionaries used communism and equality for their respective revolutions.

While historians, such as Ranke, have had a major focus in their historical works on objectivity, the history profession often falls into the trap of promoting myths (Popkin, 76). In 1986, William McNeil attacked historical works that promoted myths and advocated for increased objectivity in historical studies (McNeil, 1). Unfortunately, even Ranke fell into the trap of promoting nationalism over objectivity (Ranke, 59). Similarly, sociology is prone to get wrapped up in myths and the ideological predispositions of the individual sociologist's country (Green, 138). Skocpol even described this realization as “frustrating” because sociologists do not have the “time” or “historical skills” to complete the “necessary primary research” (Green, 138). **Both sociology and history have their similar weaknesses.**  

However, history and sociology have two different purposes. Historians study the past to develop narratives surrounding historical events while sociologists initially look to test theories and assumptions made about classes and society’s institutions. **Because the historical narrative allows for historians to properly analyze more issues, (such as the impact of ideology and individuals on historical events), historians are able to provide a more complete and holistic presentation than sociologists.**


8: very much appreciate the effort to use past readings to inform your comment. but i'm a little confused how sociology is too narrow when concered about "bigger social instituion[s]", or how the claim that "sociology is prone to get wrapped up in myths and the ideological predispositions" does not apply to historians. Are historians really that much more objective? Although both disciplines seek "truth" about people, aren't they simply equally  but differently flawed enterprises?
