### History vs Sociology Comment
Jerome T. Mondragon

History and Sociology are 2 distinct subjects and are not related. Both sociology and defined differently and is difficult to infuse together. Sociologist can' t be a historian because their evidence is too analytical and requires numerical data. They also lack the skills to evaluate sources and formulate an historical idea. Similarly, historians can't be sociologists because they put subjective and artistic spin within their work. 

First and foremost, both fields are defined differently and contain different requirements. The field arose in the mid-ninteenth century and emphasized using emperical data as evidence. According to the renowned Max Weber, sociology is formulated from models and patterns or social events. History on the other hand focusses on the causal analysis and attribution of action, structures, and personalities. (Green and Troup, p. 112) Most importantly, most sociologists also agree that social conflict is necessary to initiate social action and change, which social involvement is paramount. (Green and Troup, 113-14) 

Sociologists and historians also differ in the way they gather and evaluate data. While the inclusion of historical scientific evidence was required since the enlightenment, sociology requires the use of numerical and statistical data. (Green and Troup, p. 111) Since the Enligtenment, historians have been trained to search for primary sources, scrutinize their authenticity, and subjectively formulate a historical idea. (Popkin 76-77) Sociologist lack these essential skills nor do they have the proper time to evaluate the proper sources. (Green and Troup, p. 118) 

A specific example of how history and sociology can't be fused together is from Theda Skocpol's work, _France, Russia, China: Structural Analysis of Social Revolutions_, While Skocpol skillfully demonstrates an efficient historical narrative, it isn't a case of sociological evidence. Her example falls victim to Sociology's rigourous requirements of inclusion: there's no statistical or numeric evidence nor is there direct social involvement or individual participation within historical events. Like _The Mediterranean_ which Braudel only compares the differing geographical aspects within the region. (Braudel, p. 101-108) However, it offers specific and individual examples of social participation. Similarly, Skocpol's work merely compares the revolutions that have occured. The only requirement id does follow is its mention of sociol conflict which create and resulted from revolutions. (Skocpol 129-140) It's only a combinanition and generalizations of revolutionary elements that have occured. Skocpol's work can only be labeled as a historical narrative and not a sociological piece.
 
While sociologists can't be historians, historians can't be sociologists either. Historians have a difficult task in creating work that is informative yet engaging. If their work is analytical and scientific, like sociology's work, it'll be too dry to read. Historians may also have an unintential bias, which is also reflecting in their writing. (Popkin p. 4-5) While it's possible to include factors within each subject matter, it's difficult to merge these differing subjects into a single topic. 

9.5: this is really great, but i wanted you to draw much more from past readings (so you can't get a 10), but this is such a nice argument about the key differences that a 9 seemed too low. as most people argued for the compatibility of the two fields, you should have spoken up more in class!

