### Social History: An Ideal Combination


Sociology seeks to explain the thought processes and actions of social groups directly involved in human societal past and present. Sociology also attempts to be impartial to empirical data while being critical, using statistical analysis and direct observations to back its claims. The study of History tends to focus on an explanation or more often a summary of events and individuals from the past **not necessarily** considering social dynamics. History can be argued to be an interpretation of the past, rather than a hard science. Even when studying historical documents, can a historian truly be impartial or **truthful?** According to **William H. McNeill**, “All truths are general. All truths abstract from the available assortment of data simply by using words” **(*Mythistory, or Truth, Myth, History, and Historians*, pg. 8).** If that is the case, what can historians do change this? History and Sociology on their own can lack full representation to explain humanity and its past, they can seem too different in approach and scope. However, we have seen that when historical scholars combined these disciplines, often a more rich and dynamic understanding of our history was developed. I argue that despite the differences between them, sociology and history have more to gain from one another than remaining separate.

**Theda Skocpol** was one such scholar who combined the disciplines of history and sociology in her works to provide a more detailed explanation/theory of social revolutions than had previously been considered. According to Skocpol, the disciplines were lacking on their own: "the social science literature was ‘frustrating’, because its explanations did not accord with the historical evidence"..."since most sociologists have neither the time nor all the historical skills to do the necessary primary research" **(*Houses* pg. )** Other thinkers such as Karl Marx, Auguste Comte, Max Weber, Emile Durkheim are considered sociologists or philosophers more than historians, yet their works and thoughts about the role society and social structures play in history have influenced generations of historians. I would say it is almost impossible to find a piece of historical writing today that does not at least allude to some aspect of social theory and all the better for it. **Henri Berr** (1863–1954) insisted that “society is a factor in the interpretation of history” **(Popkin, *FHTH*, pg. 103).**

The **Annales school** is a clear example of the influence sociology had within historical thinking. The notion of a **"total history"** offered more than simple chronology or a focus on kings and kingdoms ever could. "All aspects of human existence were potentially worthy of study" **(*FHTH* pg. 22-23, 111-112).** Sociology and its thinkers offered a stepping stone for social history which could then expand further into studies of cultural, economic, gender, and civil histories that were previously overlooked or ignored. **(*FHTH*, pg. 130-131)**

I agree with William McNeill that "historians' truths, like those of scientists, evolve across the generations". **(*Mythistory*, pg. 9)** History had to evolve to see multiple perspectives. Sociology and history are interconnected despite their differences in approach. To separate them would be counter-productive and disingenuous for truly understanding humanity and its past. As Lucien Febvre and Marc Bloch asserted, History is only truly complete when it takes influence from multiple disciplines. Sociology plays a key role in that.

9: good examples from past readings to help make your point. you outline very niclely key differences at the beginning, but then these kind of drop out as you show they can be easily combined. it's also important to consider how distinct sociology and history might be as disciplines with different methods and sources and goals. so, although the reading for today suggests that there are lots of examples (like skocpol), we should carefully consider whether they are really doing both disciplines at once or just talking about history of society (which is much more history than sociology)
