Sociology and history are different approaches to the study of the past that are composed of different methods with different forms of evidence. Sociology has an "importance of empirical data" (Green and Troup, p. 111). Whereas, "To be history: facts, together, form a pattern that is understandable and credible" (McNeill, p. 2). While both are striving for finding the truth in the past, it would be hard to separate the two as they have become closely intertwined. 

History appears to be easier to influence than sociology, in the sense that throughout From Herodotus to H-Net it talks about how in the medieval period, religion was the biggest factor and focus in historical writing then into the early modern period where nationalistic historical writing began to flourish. Sociology is based in scientific data that doesn't really offer the opportunity for influences, such as religion, to change the answers provided.

Sociology also seems to allow for more than one focus or topic to be present in a certain writing. History has always been subjected to different opinions from different people within the field that have done research which supports the author's claim or argument (McNeill). Most times, a historian is only going to write about one subject in one paper or book, they want the reader to understand the history that back up their claims, as well as, their claim. Sociology, on the other hand, allows for an author to pose more than one idea/topic in their writing. For example, in Theda Skocpol's, France, Russia, China: A Structural Analysis of Social Behaviors, she talks about three successful social revolutions that have taken place in France, Russia, and China and how each one had been started by a different cause (Green and Troup, p. 129-140). They each held similarities with the others, but in fact, the motivation or driving forces behind them were different. Skocpol discussed each revolution and the cause behind them which allowed her to explore more than one example and more than one agenda in a single writing piece. 

While history and sociology do maintain their own differences from one another, it would be hard to ignore the information that both, combined, can give us about the past. Together, they work together to not only find the truth in the past but to get a better understand of the past. 

8: formatting is MUCH better now! don't forget to use bold, italics, etc to highlight key ideas. although you mention it, i was hoping for a bit more from past readings to make your argument about the similarities and differences as we've seen so far. also, most of your comment seems to be list of differences, but do try to link them together and have a logical progression through your ideas--right now i couldn't find a common thread throughout the post.
