## Sociology versus History
#### Houses of History p. 110-140
#### Lynsie Hojnowski
---

Sociology and history have fundamental differences in academic fields. **While historians and sociologists' research can overlap, they approach them with different goals making a seamless integration of the two disciplines challenging.** Auguste Compte coined the phrase 'sociology' and followed an inductive method developing **"general theories from empirical data"** and examining social systems and how they work (_Houses of History_ p. 111). This emphasis on general theories contrasts from historians research,  as Ranke famously stated, which is **"to show what actually happened"** (Popkin, p. 76). Historians' motivations and how they approach history can differ, but their overarching goal is to describe the past and explain why it is valuable. Many historians, such as Ranke, Le Roy Ladurie, Bloch, and Marx, value different historical epochs and "common history" as unique (_Houses_, p. 35, 92; Popkin p. 112; Gil, p. 384). The value of this specific history becomes lost in sociology because the goal is a generalization.

Both history and sociology have their strengths and weaknesses on their own and as an interdisciplinary subject. However, I think they can be _potentially_ be combined. Weber best explains **"sociology formulated models or types and general rules or patterns of social events, whereas history 'aims at the casual analysis and causal attribution of individual actions, structures and personalities that have cultural significance'"** (_Houses_, p. 112). While I disagree that the analysis of historians is casual, there is some truth to what he says. While not all historians look at individuals or singular events, i.e., Braudel or Marx, there is a great body of work dedicated to individuals and singular events. I agree with Skocpol that "comparative historical sociology should only be attempted where a large historical literature already exists" in order to assure that sociological explanations accord with historical evidence (_Houses_, p. 118).

Theda Skocpol demonstrates the difference between sociology and history by stating **"theory in social science should concern itself only with general phenomena; the 'unique' should be relegated to 'narrative historians'"** (_Houses_ p. 123). Throughout Skocpol's article, she uses general characteristics of agrarian states to form a hypothesis on the causation of revolutions as a social phenomenon. Skocpol claims that the French, Russian, and Chinese revolutions were all due to the government's inability to credibly meet the "challenges posed by involvement in the modernizing world" (_Houses_ p. 137). She makes broad claims regarding revolutions, yet often does not supply an adequate historical reference to justify these claims (_Houses_ p. 127, 128). Despite this, she does use historical data to formulate a hypothesis on why some countries are more prone to revolutions and tests it using the French, Russian, and Chinese revolutions, combining sociology and history (_Houses_ p. 121-140).
