### Historical Sociology

History and sociology are closely linked and inexorably intertwined, though still maintain a degree of independence. In this way, social historian and philosopher, Weber has it right (Green/Troup p. 112). “…_sociology formulated models or types and general rules or patterns of social events, whereas history ‘aims at the causal analysis and causal attributions of individual actions, structures and personalities that have cultural significance_.’” By no means are the two incompatible systems, rather when used together as analytical tools, they enable better understanding of the other. **One can evaluate the historical record without paying mind to the sociological factors**, _but inevitably will miss important factors which help define and explain our human history_. Similarly, **it is conceivable to make sociological implications without particular consideration to historiography** (much in the way Marx formed many of his philosophies, only to go back and support them with the historical record (Rockmore pp. 489-91)), however, _there is bound to be a loss of context and insight that comes with proper support of history_.

Sociology has always been present in historical writing. From Herodotus and religious-focused history, to the rigid and particularly lacking elements of Ranke’s style (Popkin pp. 98-99), **elements of societal discourse and interaction are central to the storytelling of a people and their past**. In fact, sometimes it is the historiographical omission of certain groups within society that drive the forces of change. With an era of empowerment for the disenfranchised, many Marxist followers capitalized on the absence of women and minorities in the historical record as a call to social awareness and justice (Popkin p. 91).

To reinforce the ideas of the bond between sociology and history, political philosophers Huntington and Lenin provide insightful definitions characterizing revolution and social change (Green/Troup p. 121). Both draw from the same foundational understand that **history is essential to societal development**. While Huntington speaks of the “myths of a society” and Lenin invokes ideas of “new social order”, the common theme of _history_ is inseparable. “Revolutions are not just extreme forms of individual or collective behavior. They are junctures of socio-historical structures and processes” (Green/Troup p. 123). Complementary to this, if one were to agree that _history_ – when taken down to its nuts and bolts – _exists to tell a story of a people_, how then **can one interpret or frame historiography without an element of sociology**?

9: "Sociology has always been present in historical writing" -- this is a big claim, so i want to see a lot more specific evidence to support that! also remember to distinguish social history (which is what you seem to be arguing is essential for any good history) from sociology as a distinct discipline. this was not well explained in the readings, so i understand and apologize for the initial confusion.
