### Historical Sociology
  Recalling last class, we come to the conclusion that history is **always viewed through some sort of lens**. History and Sociology, as disciplines, are just lenses in which we can look at the world and make sense of it. Sociology aims to explain how societal change comes about and how individuals, or groups of individuals, deal with this change. History aims to explain the present while using the past. Historical Sociology, then, aims to explain and describe social phenomenon using a historical lens of the past. **Combining these two disciplines allows for scholar Theda Skocpol to first theorize about specific social phenomenon that lead to revoluions, and then explain their historical significance.**
  The strength of sociology lies in it's focus on societal change, however Theda Skocpol criticized sociology for not taking an interest in social revolutions (Skocpol, 3457). Skocpol mentions that **sociologists tend to group revolutions into the 'deviance' category**, and thus fail to really study what causes them. the strength of history lies in it's ability to use accurate historical accounts and explain them in relation to the present. Although history explains the past in relation to the present, the discipline fails to theorize why revolutions, for example, begin in the first place. This is what allows these two disciplines to mix together so well. **Both disciplines lack something that the other carries**. These two disciplines compliment one another.
  Using sociology first to theorize why revolutions take place, **Skocpol develops a hypothesis before commencing with the historical analysis** (Skocpol, 3498). By understanding the societal issues taking place in **France, China, and Russia**, she is able to then explain the motives for the revolutions that are taking place (Skocpol, p.3267). In this way, Skocpol states that **revolutions are 'socio-historical'** (Skocpol, p.3471). In studying the three societies mentioned previously, she is able to learn of the complications that peasants in these agrarian societies are facing (Skocpol, p.3509). These agrarian beuacracies are unable to keep up with the modernity happening in the world around them and thus face a **breakdown of social control**. This breakdown stirs a social revolution (Skocpol, p.3548). We see many similarities to **Marxist history**. Marx himself drew upon social factors (class struggle) in order to make historical arguments. One example is Marx's belief in struggles between classes being essential to all historical narratives (Greeen, p.1220). In closing, historical sociology allows for both disciplines to work together and to explain both the structural and social changes that take place in the world. 
