## Historical Sociology 
### Comment
History and sociology are two studies that are often compared and paralleled. However, there are crucial differences in how research in each field is conducted. History relies on the **causal**, basing itself in research and generally **a-theoretical** findings (Houses, p. 112, 118, & 122). Sociology finds **general rules and patterns** of social events, focused in structure and large-scale change (Houses, p. 112, 121-122). Despite this, they are much more intertwined in modern historiographical works, fusing together on a larger scale from the professionalization of history in the 19th century. This stems from a natural evolution of historiography, as history without narrative is considered by many to not be history. **Without the context of sociology in these past events, you cannot construct as well of a narrative as expected in the modern day.** History and sociology complement each other in such a way that improve both fields. 

Causality is a defining difference between history and sociology. In ancient Greece, philosopher Aristotle believed that the main “distinction between [a] historian and [a] poet is… that the one describes the thing that has been, and the other a kind of thing that might be” (Popkin, p. 30). While Aristotle specifically mentioned a poet, he considered poetry as philosophic and sociological, which he considers “superior to history because the latter was limited to the more or less accidental sequence of actual events, whereas the former dealt with general issues” (Popkin p. 31). Without a proper background of the overarching social constructs and norms from sociology, a historian cannot conduct research that exemplifies *total history*.

One can see sociology weave its way into historical work increasingly throughout the eras. Most “Greek and Roman historians had rarely asked themselves whether the overall course of human history was leading in a particular direction” (Popkin, p. 36). This question is centered in sociology, how will certain social events affect society? The rise of Christianity in Medieval Western Europe created a precedent for history to predict the future, how all of history is tied with the bible and the end of times (Medieval Mirror, p. 101). Niccolo Machiavelli’s historical work of Florence’s clearly displayed causality by explaining its history as a result of human power conflicts in a political and social context (Popkin, p. 50). Marx’s work in the 19th century had a massive impact on historical work. **His use of history to back up his sociological views only strengthened his argument.** The rise of “total history” in the 20th century only proves this argument, that history and sociology can only compliment each other when conducting a narrative. 

10: excellent historical analysis. would like a clearer statement of your argument--or what your post is about. you bolded the statement about narrative at the beginning, but you don't talk about narrative after that. your thesis seems to be that sociology has gradually become more central to history, which is a great observation. make a clear statement to that effect!
