## The Professionalization of Historiography and the Ranke School of History

Popkin beginnings his chapter on the nineteenth century by stating that in the early 1800s *"historical scholars would achieve greater prestige and more influence in politics and culture than"* ever before or since **(Popkin. 68)**. This is an interesting claim to start with as the rest of the chapter looks at the contributions of Ranke to **the professionalization of history** and a set and formatted way of writing history, being with the original sources. The other part of the chapter looks at **how historians helped to develop the idea of national history** and how they *influenced* politics and political events through their writing **(Popkin. 82)**. **These two ideas are contradictory**. Historical writing should be held to a high standard, both professionally and independent of political influence and ideology.

The standardization of the study of history is seen best in Ranke's research seminar. It that allowed students to actually learn how to write history and debate and defend their positions, while at the same time creating a elite group of historians, who could discount and delegitimize narratives they did not approve of **(Popkin. 77-78)**. The seminar helped the professionalization of history, it limited the number of people who could participate, and I would argue that it is this environment that helped led to the rise of national histories.

Ranke believed strongly in the idea that a historian's job is **"to show what actually happened"** and only what happened. According to Ranke historians should not judge the past based on their own values and morals but rather look only at the original documents **(Popkin. 76)**. I disagree with Ranke that we should not apply our own morals and judgments onto past events but it must be done in a way, that allows historians to look at the reasons behind actions that today we see as wrong. And there is a balance to be found between condemning all actions and practices we find wrong by today's standards. Events such as the Holocaust are wrong regardless of when we judge them. I agree more with his view that the historian must clearly show what point they are trying to make. I would not go as quite far as Ranke does in that the historian must show ***"unity and progress of events"*** and clearly lead the reader to their conclusion **(Popkin. 77).** I think it is important for the historian to make a clear argument but it is for the reader to decide if the conclusion makes sense. Ranke and his school of history focused on the history of politics, and political events with less regard for economic or cultural changes in society **(Popkin. 79)**. As a result Ranke mainly wrote national history and in 1841 he was appointed as the offical Prussian state historian **(Gil .384)**

I think it is very telling that at the **same time people began to have a rigorous and set way of writing history,** that led to a *legitimate and professional* form of history, **we also see the rise of national and state history**. By standardizing the study and writing of history it allows for people to discount the achievements of marginalized people and groups, which does not give a more complete view of historical events.
