**19th Century History Questions**

-In the 19th century, nationalist philosophies blossomed across Europe and the rest of the world. Popkin explained that historians began to cover history through the “the story of nation-states” as they played a “major role” in the spread of nationalist ideologies (Popkin, P. 70). In McNeill’s reading on mythistory, McNeill expressed concern about covering national identity in an “us versus them” mindset lead to conflict. He stated that it is the “moral duty” of historians to de-escalate tensions between rival or opposing groups (McNeill, p. 7). Do 19th century historians deserve any blame for nation-state conflicts such as the Napoleonic Wars (1802-1813), the Opium Wars in China (1839-1840, 1856-1860), Spanish-American War (1898) and other 19th century nation-state conflicts? Are 19th century historians slightly, largely or not at all responsible for heightened nationalist tensions entering the 20th century?

-Popkins explained that the French Revolution encouraged the growth of viewing history “from below” to see how common people impacted a nation (Popkin, p. 71). He goes on to write about Napoleon’s successes in conquering Europe (Popkin, p. 72). Does 19th century history primarily focus on “great men” and their contributions to society? 

-The 19th century German historian Ranke advocated that historians should present “what actually happened” and hard facts to readers (Popkin, p. 76). Ranke wanted historians to engage in primary source research and craft narratives about past events. Other historians also made key contributions to the growing professionalism of history such as Heinrich Sybel who added that peer review be included in the publication of history (Popkin, P. 81). Do you think that Ranke is the individual most responsible for bringing professionalism to 19th century history?  

-Donald Kelly objected to the emergence of nationalism or nation-state history. He believed that it was the newest form of “mythistory” that was popular because of its “emotional appeal rather than its factual basis” (Popkin, P. 82). Many emerging nation-states funded the study of their national history to give their citizens a better understanding of the country’s national identity. Do you agree or disagree that nationalist history is “mythistory”? If you disagree, what are some specific examples of 19th century nationalist “mythistory?”

-The French philosopher Auguste Comte created the theory “positivism,” which states only good arguments can arise from “positively established facts” (Popkin, P. 87). Many of positivism’s followers believe that “if the you got the facts’ rights, the conclusions would take care of themselves” (Popkin, P. 87). Is it possible for an historian to have an argument with 100% accurate facts but present a false and misleading narrative? 

-Gil explained that Ranke did not want historians to approach history with abstract concepts but with applicable explanations (Gil, p. 388). However, a philosopher will seek to understand the world through abstract concepts, and a “deeper spiritual reality.” Can Ranke’s views on historgraphy's practices lead to historians failing to develop a greater holistic of their research? 

-Ranke did not believe that historians should “judge the past” and make moral assumptions (Gil, p. 384). (Popkin, P. 76). By opposing historians who present “moral lessons” alongside their work, did that negatively impact the consumers of history? If a piece of history was presented by Enlightenment historians that pushed their audience to learn from the failures of the past, would that same audience be more likely to enact better solutions to improve the future? 
