## Professionalization of History Discussion Questions


- **How valid is Historical Fiction as a way to organize and present History?** Keep in mind that Historical Writing and Historical Fiction both organize history into a **_narrative_**. Is the inclusion of fictional people a significant enough falsity that it invalidates the narrative entirely? 
- Does the **nature of the genre of fiction**- to tell a story that is undoubtedly not true- exclude Historical Fiction _entirely_ from being able to tell a factual historical account? If not, where is the line then drawn? (Thinking about our discussions on what truths are "more true" than others, could we even comfortably draw a line between what is and what is not a factual historical account?)
- If a Historical Fiction account is more "accurate" (interpret the term as you will) than a Nationalist account, does the Nationalist account still remain more valid than the fiction account, just because Nationalist history is more widely accepted as a stylistic choice?
- Thomas Gil writes that **"the historian should not judge the past"** _(p. 384)_. In theory, this sounds easy, but in practice, is it actually possible to be completely objective about a history that the historian is personally invested in? (If the historian isn't invested in the history they are writing, why would they even write it?)
- Ranke placed great importance on reporting the history **objectively**, without being critical of historical periods and their accompanying beliefs, and highly favored the use of **original documents** in recording History _(Popkin 77)_. How did this change the way we study and record history now, keeping in mind that original documents decay with age and are far outnumbered by secondary and tertiary sources in the modern era? Can we trust a historical narrative that does _not_ use primary sources?
- After reading the passage from _From Herodotus to H-Net_ about **Nationalism and Historical Scholarship** do you think there is a way to fix the recording of Nationalist Histories without alienating other groups _(p. 82-6)_? If so, how? OR, is writing Universal Histories that include all peoples instead the answer to the problems that the writings of nationally focused history can cause?

7: This is a nice set of general questions, but mostly open-ended questions about contemporary historical practice. Be sure to include questions (you can have more!) that grapple with the readings themselves (what kind of story is the author telling? why?), or that question the significance of the points the author is making, or that ask us to put the historiographical content we're getting for today in broader (historical) context considering what we've read thus far.  
