## Nineteenth Century/Rise of Academic Scholarship
### Questions/Discussion Points

1. In the very beginning of the chapter, Popkin mentions several authors/scholars, **Adolphe Thiers, Thomas Macaulay, and Heinrich von Treitschke**. How might a scholar's cultural background or involvement in current events and politics affect their writings about history? Would their histories have had a different theme or message if these men had not been involved in momentous events or influential groups? **(FHTH pg. 68)**
2. Why might **Freidrich Meinecke's** view of **historicism** and an emphasis on the historical context of an era be problematic in the cases of comparing current events to those of the past (i.e. racism in America today vs 60 years ago)? How could this view lead to a slippery slope of excusing past crimes and horrors such as the Holocaust? **(pg 69)**
3. Do you think the French Revolutionaries were being hypocritical in their judgement of the past by destroying documents and artwork of the past monarchy and yet creating their own archives and chronicles? **(pg. 71)**
4. What arguments can you make either for or against the dramatization of historical events in artwork, novels, and films? **Jacob Burkhardt** discussed an emphasis on cultural history; how might the study of art history or architecture make this debate even more complicated? **(pg. 75, pg 79)**
5. Do you agree with **Barthold Niebuhr**, that relying on the ancient historians of the past to write modern history is like **"people [who] take maps and landscapes for reality itself"**? Based on what we've previously read about Livy or Herodotus, is this a fair assessment by Niebuhr or can there still be some benefit to the ancient models of the past? **(pg 76-77)**
5. **Leopold von Ranke**, is considered by many to be the founder of **modern scientific historiography** and was quoted as saying that the task of a historian was "to show what actually happened". Can a historian truly do this and look at the past without his/her own biases or the background of their own era? **(*Thomas Gil*, pg 383) (FHTH pg. 76)** What do scholars like **Hayden White** say to contradict Ranke's definition of history? **(pg 80)**
6. How is Ranke's model for teaching history similar to our own study within this class? **(pg 78)**
7. How were nationalist based historical writing practices beneficial for countries like Japan, Egypt, or India? Why were authors **Thomas Madiou and Alexis Beaubrun Ardouin** important for representing African histories and outweighing the racialist ideas from some Western historians? **(PG 85, 88-89)**
8. How does Popkin's analysis of non-Western scholars and historians of the 19th century compare to his previous chapters? Has his representation improved?
9. Do you agree with Thomas Gil that Leopold von Ranke believed **history is the best way to understand human nature and access social and political reality?** How did Ranke justify this belief while still staying true to his objectivity of "actual history"? **(Gil, pg. 389-390)**
