### What Is The Point Of History? Connection.

One cannot deny that Leopold Ranke contributed significantly to the study of history with his principles of "Historism". **While I agree with some of Ranke’s theories, I cannot fully support them.** Historians should not present historic events simply as facts because without a narrative history becomes meaningless; nor should they completely remove themselves as individuals from the sources they examine (p. 384). _History cannot be sterile._

Discovering _"what actually happened"_ is a crux in Ranke's principles, as well as the foundation of historiography as we know it (p. 384). His commitment to source documents is still a requirement for historians today but how he insists we use the knowledge we gain is ridiculous. Ranke demands that historians have _“strict presentation of the particular events and facts, even if that is unattractive and dull, should unquestionably be the supreme law in historiography”_(p. 384). Not only is this a disservice to the time and effort a historian put into their research, but it is a disservice to anyone who interacts with their publication.  **When you remove humanity from history, all that is left is sterile data.**

**The importance of history lies is in the connection we develop with the past.** History is not just about societies or empires; it is about people and decisions the decisions they made. When historians distance themselves from social and moral aspects of history, they negatively impact the representation of the past. We should not describe facts, but specific moments and **why** they are essential. These descriptions include making judgments, especially moral ones, about the past and a conclusion that readers can take and apply for the future (p. 384). **When you remove emotion, and thus narrative, from history, we understandably do not feel anything which prevents us from connecting to those events.** If we are not connected to history, there is no point is chronicling the events that transpire or researching the past. There is always a balance between historians’ interests and objectivity of source material, but neither should outweigh the other.  **If we do not care about our history, if we do not answer _why_ it is important, what is the point of reviving the past?**

Poet Olivia Gatwood stated in her Ted Talk that **"we find connection through the specific"**.  She was describing the power of specificity in a poem, which can connect the author to a universal audience, but it applies to history as well. For example, when describing the liberation of Jews from concentration camps in Poland or Germany in 1945, you can list the numbers of people liberated, the numbers that died, or any of the objective facts. Those facts will never have the same impact on society the way that the diary of a thirteen-year-old girl from the Netherlands had. _Any historical event does not become vital to our society until emotions, morals, and humanity are put into that data, connecting us to those in the past._

9: well written and clearly argued. would like to see you drawing from the reading a bit more to discuss other people mentioned who might have agreed with your comment here, and whether Ranke himself actually practiced the history the way he _said_ it should be done. also, your topic clearly overlaps with many discussions of rhetoric and uses of history from prior readings--looping those strengthens your argument even more.
