### Comment on the Professionalization of Historiography

**Speculation is tied to historiography as much as gluttony or lust is a part of humanity.** Though one might be able to imagine a world without vice, the utopic idea is just that – a far-reaching fantasy. The writing of history is dependent on educated interpretation of evidence from reliable sources. In order to be considered reputable, professional historians have collective standards and agreed-upon practices when producing historiographical work. _These principles and norms act as the tightest regulatory mechanism_ (at least for now) _that can be implemented in order to ensure the quality of historical product._

Leopold Ranke’s stringent theories regarding historiography are German to their core. **The notion that one can totally remove themselves from a narrative is not only absolutist, it’s absurd.** Ranke’s “primacy of facts” (Gil p. 384) are most basically out of touch with the nature of mankind and show a clear misunderstanding of history. If one were to consider historiography based solely on “hard facts”, one would not have produced a necessarily more accurate or “factual” account, simply a dry ledger, lacking narrative or context. _Statistics, by themselves, are still in need of greater composition and a storyline that relates one to another._ Without the essential narrative – the story being told – numbers mean nothing and stand-alone statistics are bound to be misunderstood, overlooked, or left out altogether, creating an equally (if not worse) historical record. **While the ‘particular’ and the ‘individual’ (Gil p. 385) act as the essential building blocks to a concrete history, the ‘general’ and the ‘universal’ provide the necessary mortar between the bricks.**

_Rather than move to abolish perspective and substantive interpretation, historians must be trained to recognize an agenda where it is present in the historical record._ By challenging the position of accepted truth, we are able to truly gain confidence in our findings. It was only through alternative perspectives between revolutionaries and their opponents that such a vibrant history of the French revolution and Napoleonic conquest could be produced and exist today (Popkin p. 72). **By no means do I believe biases should be embraced or encouraged, however, their existence should not be denied. Rather, the extent to which they operate should understood and used to produce evidence and a narrative to the contrary.** Ledgers of statistics are unlikely to be challenged, and without contested theory, there can be no progress. This back-and-forth between competing evidences and alternative interpretations is the essence of history as a study. While it may not present laws like the natural sciences, the goals of historiography are equally as complex and perhaps demand more critical thought than their “hard science” counterparts.
