## How Leopold Ranke furthered Eurocentrism.

Leopold Ranke’s application of the scientific method to history endangered and set back areas of history outside of Western Europe. In this statement I am not offering preference to Hegel’s approach of philosophical history, nor am I condemning the attempt to bridge the gap between the hard sciences and history. I am only criticizing Ranke’s methodology. His scientific historiography naturally focuses on *concrete evidence* in the form of written documents, as history should be “documentary, not speculative” (Gil p. 385). The Rankean seminar system highlighted this, as any oral history was not utilized. One would think that the invention and proliferation of the printing press in the late-Renaissance and Early-Modern era would create great demand to catalog these oral histories, but this is not mentioned in any material we have read in class.
 
 In his seminar environment, Ranke insisted on professionalism in historiographical research, affirming that history can only be “learned through specific training” (Popkin p. 78). This idea naturally holds history to a higher standard, one that seeks to accurately tell   **what actually happened**. I am not criticizing professionalism in research, it has paved the way for the modern historian. However, it created another barricade to legitimizing the research of history in the rest of the world, which would not catch on in popularity until the late 20th century (some would say it still has not). 
 
 The nineteenth century began with the idea that each society must be individualized in their histories and understood through its own culture and traditions (Popkin p. 69). Ranke and his methods actively fought to diminish this thought. To Ranke, the history of individuals is only used as evidence to contribute to a universal perspective. (Gil p. 390). This is evident in Ranke’s works on nationalism. He focuses much more on the overarching political systems and traditions than the cultural or social aspects of societies (Gil p. 385). 

In Popkin’s work, we see him briefly summarize the early-modern historiographical methods utilized by Chinese, and Islamic faiths. These societies do not receive the same detail as Western Europe, and this is representative of Eurocentrism, but more importantly Ranke’s methods. Due to Ranke’s popularity, much of the Early-Modern research is about the Western World, and Popkin’s lack of detail in other areas reflects this. In an effort to only work with *what actually happened*, much of the material created during the early-modern period featured only Western nations. I do not believe that Ranke’s methods set back historiography, for academic scholarship during his time has an immense presence in the way it is conducted today. But Ranke’s insistence on professionalism, universalism, and written documents contributed to the rampant Eurocentrism of the early-Modern era. 
