# Foucault's Archeaology of Knowledge & Birth of the Clinic
The respective prefaces to Michel Foucault's *Archeaology of Knowledge* and *Birth of the Clinic* are a useful pairing of readings as the former outlines Foucault's historical methodology and the latter is an example of it in use. For me the archeaology of knowledge was a fascinating insight into how Foucault interprets and organizes the past. While the language can sometimes be difficult as I began to understand the concepts more and more I found that I fundamentally agreed with many of Foucault's main points. Getting past much of the high diction the main point I felt Foucoult's methodology focused on were two main entities, that of over arching narratives and the true context of documents. Foucault rejects approaches which work to try to construct a neat overarching theme within history. In doing this he points to the fact that since history is document based only some elements of history remain and in a fundamentally aberrated form. 

In part 2 of Archeaology of Knowledge Foucault postulates "The field of discursive events , on the other hand, is a grouping that is always finitie and limited at any moment ot the linguitistic sequences thta have been formulated; they may be innumerable, they may, in sheer size, exceed the capacities of recording, memory, or reading: nevertheless they form a finite grouping". (A of K 27) This passage shows Foucault's fundamental theory about history. Which is **our understanding of an event is immediately finite due to the fact that our understanding is entirely limited based on the linguistic vehicles we have to interpret an event from.** The most interesting part of the articles in my opinion is his follow up to that statement in which he brings up the question of by what rules allowed this statement to be made as opposed to another possible statement? **I think the analysis of linguistics is extremely useful in History as unlike archeaology our knowledge base lies entirely within the the imperfect transmission of ideas through human language.** 

Foucault addresses this fundamental fact earlier in Archaeology of Knowledge when he descirbes how "History, in its traditional form, undertook to 'memorize' the *monuments* of the past, transform them into *documents*, and lend speech to those traces, which in themselves, are often not verbal, or which to say in silence something other than what they actually say; in our time history turns documents into monuments" (7) This statement really piqued my interest as it points out that within our relience of documents we turn their fundamentally removed and incomplete snippet into the event itself. When Foucault says they say in silence something other than what they actually say he alludes to the fact that events themsleves are fundamentally multi dimensional to an extremely varied degree, and when transcribed into document form they become one dimensional and influenced by the limits of human language. Thus our concept of for example the Medieval period is not one built of any essential truth that unites the so called era, **but rather a consequence of our colllection of documents and how we have chosen to organize them.** In this way the documents become the monument as we build our ideas entirely from the documents even though they are an extremely limited vehicle for only a certain grammar of events and ideas as other grammars have not survived. This is where the rules of discirusive regularities come into play in an interesting way, as what rules allowed it so that the history of the medieval world that we do have came to be while other fundamental historical grammars (ie the life of a bulgarian peasant) have been lost. Overall Foucault likens documents to providing the same level of information as an archaelogical artifact that is non- language based. Both items provide an inferred meaning based on our interpretations but both are fundamentally lacking in providing the totality of experience. Overall I really enjoyed these pieces because much as Hayden White's metahistory did, it seems at face value like foucault is discounting the historical discipline which by his own admission he is not. **Foucault to me is challenging historians and the discipline to form a more complete and self auditing methodology** one that does not elevate documents to the level of monuments which has been common historical practice for centuries. **It reminds us of the fundamental truth about documents in which they are multiple degrees seperated from the event to the reader as the initial interpretation, then transcription then reading of them means that each successive transfer some essential knowledge is lost.**
