# **_Birth of a Clinic and Archeology of Knowledge_**

## **_Michel Foucault_**

### Main points and points of interest

In **_Birth of a Clinic,_** Foucault begins by analyzing epidemic diseases and the analysis of characteristics of an epidemic. He expresses that epidemic diseases must employ a complex method of observation when dealing with the historic individuality of the nature of diseases. He regards the concept of an epidemic as a **_collective phenomenon,_** which requires multiple gazes and perspectives, with cross-checking of viewpoint in repeatedly corrected information.(Birth of a Clinic, 26) These *"gazes"* meet the individual, unique, nucleus of these collective phenomena. Foucault states that at the end of the 18th century, this form of experience became institutionalized.(Birth of a Clinic, 26) The communication of physicians was critical, supplemented by constant, constricting intervention. A medicine of epidemics is opposed at every point to a medicine of classes, which is a collective perception of a phenomenon that is widespread, but unique.(BOAC, 27) The medicial field now had a political status and positioning at the state level. Foucault questions the figures that distribute the information and medical expertise, as well as, supervise and regulate the medical field. There became a sudden re-organization of medical knowledge, which was a constantly revised information. The **_medical gaze_** denotes the dehumanizing medical separation of the patient's body from the patients identity. I found it interesting that there was a shift in the medical profession from the medieval clergy to the new medical doctor, who saved and "understood" the entirety of the body and not the soul. Foucault's main point was to express the need and existing change in the theory of medical knowledge itself, in regards to its methods, validity, and scope.

In **_Archeology of Knowledge,_** Foucault discusses the changing of old questions of traditional historical analysis, which are now being replaced. Instead of a focus of time frames, such as periods or centuries, knowledge is viewed through ruptured continuity. These interruptions vary in status and nature considerably and alter the traditional values and importance of stable structures.(Archeology of Knowledge, 4) Dispersed events became the basic elements of historical analysis, which allowed historians to individualize different domains, but can only be established by comparing those domains.(AOK, 9) There was now a major shift from a **_total or general history_** to a contemporary study of history of ideas, which depends on continuities that break down under close inspection. Foucault critiques the dogmatic structure readings of history and philosophy that express continuous narratives as simplistic ways of projecting our own conscousness onto the past, thus creating exclusivity and exclusion. Broadly defined modes of knowledge fail to do justice to the complex nature of the discourses of history. Another main point Foucault expresses, is in regards to rhetoric and statements in that statements are not simply phrases or speech acts, but rather a much more complex constitution of a network of rules. Those rules establish which expressions are discursively meaningful. Foucault provides a complex analysis of what knowledge means and how that meaning has changed in regards to approaches, methods, varied perspectives and ultimate narratives.
