Elena Farmin
Foucault, Archeology of Knowledge, p. 21-39
Foucault, The Birth of the Clinic, p. 3-20

From what I have seen on posts submitted by my classmates, it is obvious that I am not the only one who struggled with trying to decipher the writings of Michel Foucault. Still, it is my duty as a student to complete this assignment. So, I shall translate today’s reading selections as best as I can. From what I could gather, the main point of Archeology of Knowledge is that history is being ruptured by discontinuity. By that, he means that systems of thought are becoming jumbled messes that lack any kind of unity (kind of like Foucault’s writings).  However, history, and any other academic field for that matter, cannot exist as an entity separate from other fields. By the end of the selection, one is still left wondering whether all this discourse is either beneficial or detrimental to history, or some kind of double-edged sword.

The Birth of the Clinic proves to be an even greater enigma as Foucault tries to make a point about history using a metaphor about medicine that goes on for way longer than it should. I can conclude that Foucault is trying to say that medicine and history are the same in that both fields require detailed and careful study. Both need to be examined on different levels or in parts to be understood as a whole. Then again, that goes for any field of study, not just medicine or history. 

What I found most interesting about the selections is just how confusing Foucault’s writing style is. The Houses of History chapter on poststructuralism and postmodernism mentions how his work has been criticized for “[refusing] to totalize his position by showing connections between the development of diverse phenomena” (Houses, p. 303). Based on what I have read I assume that statement is referring to Foucault’s tendency towards extended metaphors and unfocused theses. The whole time I was reading both selections I kept thinking “Get to point!” or “What are you trying to get at?!” I am just grateful that I was not the only one confused by Foucault’s writing. 

Another aspect of Foucault that I found interesting has to do with something that I discovered about him from an Internet search. Apparently, he rejected the label of poststructuralist and postmodernist even though his work is often cited as such. Why else would he be mentioned in that aforementioned chapter on those subjects in The Houses of History? It is just fascinating how a man dedicated his life’s work to critiquing notions of modernism but did not identify his work as poststructuralist or postmodernist.
