## Should I *Really* be in this Class if I Couldn't Understand a Single Word of Faucault?
### Alt. Title: What the Foucault? 
#### Alt. Alt. Title: Please Don't Grade This

Foucault’s round about writing style, and his tendency to *completely* disregard a topic and then just as soon espouse its values, made this a very difficult task. My understanding is flimsy at best, but I do know that Foucault seemed to believe all of the previous methodologies of studying history were flawed, and needed to be trashed. Foucault is the epitome of nihilism. Foucault also believes that there is a *single* correct way of studying history. Not a variety of approaches, not differing beliefs surrounding the study of history, only his way, and everything before his way is wrong. Foucault seems to throw the entire discipline of history out the window, citing creative differences, but then goes back on this entire chapter, and states that we might end up with the same forms of continuity that we had before. To say the least, I am confused. 

A common theme in Foucault’s ramblings is that of the problems with language. To paraphrase his main points, he believes that all language is flawed, and within history that creates a multitude of problems. This comes as no great surprise, as most post-structural historians found issues with the use of language. These “facts of discourses” are not “universally recognized characteristics” (Discourse, pg. 22). While this is true, especially across different cultures, we cannot accomplish anything without **some** form of categorization. Science and religion can be seen through two very different perspectives, and are not the same thing. Foucault seems to take this lack of classifications to the extreme. No matter *how* flawed language is, human beings function by categorizing things. Without even the most basic classifications, would we be able to function highly enough to achieve the level of intellect the Foucault is at?

*The Birth of Clinic* was very difficult. The general concepts, like the origins of medicine, were somewhat understandable. Taking the readings and connecting them to historiography was the more pressing challenge. Firstly, it seemed ironic that we were reading two of Foucault’s pieces of literature. In *The Archeology of Knowledge*, Foucault painstakingly describes all of the issues with the classifications of books, no matter if they come from the same author or not. He believes that “the frontiers of a book are never clear-cut”, and that there are too many problematic areas within books to fully rely on them (Discourse, pg. 23). Foucault also goes on to attack *continuity* within books, destroying the notion that any book is a standalone. To Foucault, every book is part of a network, always referencing other works. So, the irony in reading two of Foucault’s pieces and trying to analyze them together, is not lost on me. 
