### Emily Delcoure
# The Critques of Criticism

There is no reason that Foucault's works and words wouldn't make sense to any given reader. However, I've had the pleasure of reading *about* Foucault many times, but never had the fortune of reading the **circular missteppings** that are his works. Now that I have, it is apparent why there is a general dislike of him and his works, but not for the reasons I had assumed.

When Foucault speaks you listen: that's not a command, or even an expectation, it's what happens naturally, and that is not necessarily because what he says has any value, but instead it's how he says it. Foucault's criticisms would burn like a knife, **if only he used the same *intense* processes to research as he does to write**. Let me do something that Foucault is apparently incapable of doing, break that generalization down: the man writes about very data heavy subjects with reckless abandon, he generalizes many unrelated subjects, and he does all this with minimal references or concrete evidence. Within the first three pages of *The Archeology of Knowledge* there is only one true footnote despite *four* references to other philosophers, historians, etc. The **continuity** of his blunder is continued in *The Birth of the Clinic*, by making only four endnotes for an entire ten-page preface and criticizing at least three other authors/philosophers without ever citing a single page of their works. In there lies the true issue, it is one thing---as a philosopher---to not cite your opinions or beliefs, or even your competing contemporaries; but to refuse to cite references when criticizing a **reference based subject** is to completely dash all hopes of being taken seriously. Foucault is still respected, and his points actually make a lot of sense, even though I'm not sure how he reached any of his conclusions or where any of his theories could be substantiated. Mainly, if you're going to criticze an entire subject and population of intellectuals at least give them the same common decency they gave you.

Foucault's ability to write, and articulate ideas is not something that I expected when I heard criticisms of his work. The man can **articulate ideas**, and the ideas that he had make sense. Stucturalism, in theory, does limit the viewpoints of historians--if they only adhered to a single structure (quantitative, scientific, microhistory, Annales, sociology, etc.) and never considered the evolution of historiography---something that would *never* be done in the modern era. Granted, many historians have found a single "house," if you will, and written only in their style, and researched only within their methodologies. If you were to simplify Foucault's introduction in *The Archeology of Knowledge*, that's all he is saying: **don't tie yourself to a single structure and let it block your world view**. This over simplification should be avoided, though, because it could lead to you making points like: "these divisions...are always themselves reflexive categories, principles of classification, normative rules..." Or that essentially every methodology, in every study, in every subject that has ever existed is just a limitation to what could be known, or studied, leaving the entirety of humanity **ignorant for the sake of uniformity, and continutity** (Foucault, *Archeology*, p. 22).

*I was *unable* to cite more than one point because that's just not the way Foucault would have wanted it, man. Don't give in to the man, man.