Foucault is wild author, he exhibits writing patterns of barely stable academic mind who has spent too much time dreaming of purely abstract illusions to the reality in which he lives. That being said he has some interesting points. The main idea Foucault is gasping for us to behold is the abstract nature of human development, if I step into the dreamscape mind of Foucault I see a visual representation of humanity that is barely linear. *To him it seems that the human perspective is an ambiguous cloud of information. The cloud is generally formless yet you can still see a loose shape to it.* **History no end to Foucault and in true form there is no academic study more essential than the other. He proposes innate meaning to all things, (a general truth if ever there was one) a meaning that is not limited to the literal presentation of an idea.** *Philosophically he lashes out at a prescribed notion of true linear history*(Arch.P.24-7). The abject reality to history is that there is no one true truth in the events of the past. There is infinite complexity to the perception of events. Within this truth his thesis of clinic originates in a belief that the assumptions of our world do not have to be taken as the singular way. He encourages a belief system that wants to question why we accept concepts as normal. This extends to his entire historical review; there is no manner in which history as a clearly identifiable sequence. **The complexity of human nature means that modern historical review in itself is an exercise in documentation of an abstract idea.** Foucault seems to say that every idea wherever it is hidden has objective value outside of its presented use. The futile attempt to systematically categorize history into a permanently organized state is an impossible goal for historians. **History should instead be dissected for ideas**, no matter how they exist. History should not aim to be a superfluous collection of academiaa. 

As confusing as the writing style that Foucault utilizes, I oddly get how hes trying to present humananity. His general theory seems to stem from an anti-grand narrative belief. Perhaps he approaches the expression of this idea with too much zeal describing the world in a strange free floating form with there is no direct shape that life must follow. His discussion of disease in the Clinic gets out of hand quickly when describing the natural perceived barriers of the disease and lifeforms. But, as silly as it may seem, his approach is one of a philosopher first asking why doctors treat us a meatbags with broken parts rather than a whole humana entity. Oddly this refelcts perfectly as *an allegory to his disection of history, should we approach it so clinicaly*(Clinic.P.15)? **By clinically analyzing history do we lose the soul of humanity that makes the past imperfect?**(Mostly, No) Foucault’s mad attempt to critique a modern world’s clinical application of medicine is strange and metaphysical in a way that makes it hardly applicable, yet his narrative is still important because it implores the readers to question their acceptance of why our modern medical science is blindly revered. 

I can certainly appreciate his mindset wishing the follow abstract notions of historical fact and refuse to rigidly adhere to the objective nature of what documents may show. However, **I feel his approach is one best suited for philosophical discourse rather than standard historical review**. Foucault’s loose application of an objective truth is dangerous narrative as it blurs a sense of fact for followers of history who do not approach with the same intensive intellectualism that Foucault ascribes too. But, for readers who appreciate absurd or ingenious (depends on reader) review of historical fact who will still allow Foucault to reach into past and pull reason and answers from a murky past can still learn a great amount from his writing. 
