# **Relentless Questioning: Foucault’s Speculative Approach to History** 

The main points of Foucault’s readings were his attempts to reclassify and contextualize historical works. Instead of adhering to a dogmatic view of history, Foucault took a much more broad and holistic approach to historical works. Foucault analyzed each individual work in the perspective of “what specific phenomena do they reveal in the field of discourse” instead of reading that historical work with the pre-conceived notion of analyzing how it relates to class conflict like Marx did (Rockmore, p. 492) (Archeology of Knowledge, p. 26). **It’s refreshing to see a historian question the foundations of historical studies and attempt to put each individual historical work into context.** 

Foucault’s perspective on history is far more speculative and discussion-oriented than the historians we have read before. In contrast to McNeill’s declarative tone about the moral duty of historians to de-escalate tensions between groups and the distinction between scholarly and popular history, Foucault’s writing style resembles a teacher that attempts to make his or her students learn and reassess their views of the world through thoughtful discussion questions (McNeill, p. 7). For example, Foucault questioned the justification for individuals to publish works of authors that are deceased (Archeology of Knowledge, p. 24). In Foucault’s work on the history of medicine, he explained how the medical industry reclassified how it diagnoses diseases and illnesses through an analytical approach (Birth of a Clinic, p. 5-8). Just as medical professionals learned to better classify each disease and illness from other, Foucault's work should give historians a better understanding of how to assess a piece of history in the grander historical context. In the histography field, Foucault is a maverick that is not interested in **imposing a narrow viewpoint or a "one size fits all approach"** on the historical field. Alternatively, he humbly challenges historians to seek greater knowledge and understanding of the past by classifying and contextualizing history. **This is why Foucault is a positive and constructive influence for late 20th century historians.** 

Foucault’s re-assessment of history was truly fascinating and enlightening for me. By the late 20th century, the study of history had already given rise to the likes of Ranke, Bloch, Aristotle and Livy. Foucault makes a very honest and realistic point that should come across as just common sense. Due to histories longevity across centuries, new historical works and examinations of history depend largely on ideas that have been “already-said” in the past (Archeology of Knowledge, p. 25). **How can late 20th century historians analyze the Roman Empire in a manner that is not influenced by the works of Livy, Polybus and Julius Caesar?** How can late 20th century historians talk about 17th and 18th century Enlightenment without just rechanneling an idea that has already been said? **How much of historical studies is just restating a point that a previous historian has already alluded on?** I appreciate Foucault’s steadfast approach that attempted to meet these challenges head-on. Foucault properly recognizes that in order for history to be productive or add to the “discourse,” that historical work must be original and offer a fresh perspective (Archeology of Knowledge, p. 25). In accordance to Foucault’s views, I believe history should be thought provoking because it makes us challenge pre-conceived notions and commonly held beliefs. 
