## What the Foucault? I Don't Know, I Found A Good Point.

Foucault’s main point seems to be that **analyzing anything within the sciences is not restricted only to the same field as that particular science** _(Archeology, p.30)_. I like this approach, at least, as it applies to history, because it falls in line with (almost) everything we’ve talked about with the evolution of the writing of history up to this point. Herodotus wanted to only use **accounts of events** that could be verified, the Annales School strove for **accuracy**, and **hard, scientifically tested evidence** was used increasingly in the recordings of history, and even **historical fiction branches into another field**— fiction, which in turn tends to rely on psychology to manipulate the views of readers, to make them feel certain ways about events or historical figures. **History is not just an isolated field.** As historians, we rely on linguistics to translate accounts from one language to another, we rely on economics to interpret trade records, we even rely on biology and immunology to understand details, like how the Black Plague, a massive, literally society-changing event, was spread. Nothing in the realm of academic study is isolated to one field.

That's not to say that I actually understand the rest of what Foucault taslked about. I understand that he was an influential writer, and that studying him is neccessary. I also understand more after we discussed him in class, and I understand more still after peer-reviewing Jacob's Postmodernism essay. However, I understand him rather... nebulously, still. I understand his writing and contributions far more than I understand sociology. This tiny bit that I feel confident saying I _actually_ understand is most interesting to me then, because I understand it. (Not just because I agree.)

Then again, in all honesty, I'm not sure I'm confident enough in what I know about Foucault to make the case that this is particularly more exciting to me than anything else was.

7
