### Foucault Comment
Jerome T. Mondragon

Michel Foucault is unique contributor to the field of history because he directly challenges the way history was traditionally interpreted. During the 20th Century, post-structuralism was developed as means to critique and deconstruct history. This movement also emphasizes what is __not included__ in historical narratives. (Green and Troup 298-299) No more is this more emphasized than Foucault's work _The Archeology of Knowledge_. His work is revoltionary because he indicates the numerous rules of history which should be discarded at all costs.

From the onset of the first chapter titled _The Unities of Discourse_, Foucault identifies the rules of history that hinders historian's interpretation and progress. Traditional "notions" of history such as tradition, influence, and spirit can't be soley trusted. (Foucault 21-22) These notions are simply systems of classification or institutionalized types. Even the authors don't immediately know what they're used for! They aren't universally recognized characteristics. (22) Ultimately, since these notions ultimately lack cohissive unity, they cannot be regarded as either definetive or absolutely valid. (30) 

The most interesting apsect of this chapter is Foucault's challenge author's credibility. It's mentioned in _Macro-to Micro History_ that "the researcher's point of view becomes an intrinsic part of the account."(Iggers 110) However, Foucault challenges this notion by asserting that we can never trust what's included in physical text. What should be included in historical material? Notes? Drawings? Grocery lists? Should we include everything but the kitchen sink and still call it history? Who constructs these narratives as well? Was it the author or someone else? Foucault asserts that context is the most important aspect of any historical material. (Foucault 24)

In his second chapter titled, _Discursive Formations_, he describes how grouped statments are also fundamentally flawed. Whether statements forming groups, connections, concepts, and even with linked themes; they're still flawed. Foucault still found faults in statements because they lack the unity of logical architecture (Foucalt 32-37). What's the point? Can small ideas in statements be linked together to form a whole structure? It's like linking many small islands together. (Foucault 23) It's the rules of statements, and language itself, which limit historian's flexibility, creativity, and initial duty. 

These criticisms towards traditional history are necessary is so that field can be liberated. History should have no origins and be free from repitition and continuity. (Foucault 25)  It's these rules that prevent us from discovering history in its purest form. As Foucault points out, however, "result of construction the rules of which must be known, and the justification of which must be scrutinized." (25) In other words, we must know the rules before they can be broken. It's what is not constructed that's important. Only then can we as students and practitioners of history can we discover something that is inherently pure. (27)

9
