### The importance of editing and getting to the point

Dear lord! This man needs an editor! I tend to have a bad habit of creating run-on sentences in my own work, but even I can see Foucault needs to take a step back and **put some damn periods in between his paragraph-long sentences**. For example, when Foucault discusses series, he begins a sentence at the end of page seven and doesn't finish until a quarter of the way onto page eight! Breaks with commas and semi-colons only go so far! Now, to be fair, I am nit-picking Foucault and will now try to focus an analyzing the point to his works rather than criticize his grammar. That being said, I’ll make one more jab at one of the sentences on page eleven which defies all logic in terms of length. What the hell did I just read!? It is also rather humorous to me how much Foucault goes on to discuss established concepts versus new concepts of grammar on pages 34 and 35 of *Archeology* when he himself does not follow basic sentence structures, but I digress….

I found Foucault’s hypothesis on medicine and its history interesting in that he argues that the field of medicine has forgotten its own past. He also questions whether doctors and historians of medicine are continuing down a path of pre-established knowledge or evolving over the course of history. (Archeology, pp. 30-33). Knowledge within medicine becomes a **”series of descriptive statements”** rather than a body of concepts. It is a bit difficult to follow Foucault’s logic here however, as he immediately states the possibility that his hypothesis could be wrong. In *The Birth of the Clinic*, Foucault goes further to explain the disparity within medicine assuming doctors and physicians were somehow newly enlightened, that they “listened to reason rather than to imagination” (preface: xii). The study of a disease becomes its own entity, the patient is not the focus of the **“medical gaze”**. Medicine and its doctors came to dehumanize the patients. “What communicates the essential 'body' of the disease to the real body of the patient are not, therefore, the points of localization, nor the effects of duration, but, rather, the quality”. “If one wishes to know the illness from which he is suffering, one must subtract the individual” (Clinic, pp. 12-15). It was only when a doctor refocused on the individual, did he realize the patient is the “disease itself”. I can relate to Foucault’s assessment as I have seen firsthand the differences between doctors who focus on the particulars of an individual’s medical issues versus a generalized assumption of a supposed disease. 

I found *“The Birth of the Clinic”* to be a bit easier to understand simply because I could relate to the topic of interest within the work. I would argue It is understandable that I have difficulty relating to the discourse of history and science when Foucault himself questions the notion: **“We are not even sure of ourselves when we use these distinctions in our own world of discourse, let alone when we are analyzing groups of statements”** (Archeology, pp 20).

It was refreshing to see by page 16 of *Archeology*, that Foucault addresses his own aversion to truly define what his main arguments are. He directly addresses that he does not wish to specifically say whether another historian is truly right or wrong; Foucault merely wishes to address his own particular thoughts on the discontinuity and discourse within "new history" and express his opinion on how other historians may proceed in their own work.
> "It rejects its identity, without previously stating: I am neither this nor that. It is not critical, most of the time; it is not a way of saying that everyone else is wrong. It is an attempt to define a particular site by the exteriority of its vicinity; rather than trying to reduce others to silence, by claiming that what they say is worthless" (*Archeology of Knowledge*, pp. 17).

We should have been prepared for this. Jeremy Popkin warned in our previous readings that, **“Foucault’s failure to address the question of what causes such shifts is one of the main points on which historians have criticized him.** Nevertheless, Foucault’s notion of discourse as the mechanism by which members of any society are shaped or “disciplined… has had far-reaching impact on historians” (FHTH pp. 137). Anna Green and Katherine Troup in *The Houses of History* also note of the criticism against Foucault, discussing his hypocrisy in viewing historical writings as fiction when he himself could be accused of the same crime. (Houses, pp. 303). When all is said and done, I can see (after much re-reading) where Foucault was going in these two works in trying to make historians aware of the complexities of discourse which affect knowledge. The realization of knowledge is not on an evolutionary tract, however the pursuit of historical knowledge should not be subjected to pre-conceived norms and rules either (At least I hope this was one of the points!).
