## _What the Foucault:_ Things Are Not As They Seem

As I read the chapters written by Foucault, specifically in **_The Archeology of Knowledge_**, I found myself questioning what I was reading until eventually I found a rhythm, and then questioned some more. (Note: This idea of a supposed rhythm may have been influenced by the number of cough/cold/flu medications I was taking while reading, nonetheless, a rhythm was found.) While reading, and then rereading, I found that some of Foucault's arguments were valid, such as we have definitions for things that are not and cannot be universal (i.e., books and oevres). The overall message I took away from his first chapter, _The Unities of Discourse_ was as he states "[pre-existing forms of continuity] may not, in the last resort, be what they seem at first sight" (Foucault, p 26). In layman's terms, things (words, histories, etc.) are not always what they appear to be, nor do they always follow a universal set of rules.  **However, while his argument is valid and logically makes sense, I do not see how exactly it is useful to the field of history. Nor do I agree with his solution of breaking down these unities or discourses to find a greater truth.**

As I was reading, I found myself drawn back to the _Fuck Nuance_ article we read earlier this month. As Healy states in his article, nuance (or for Foucault, discourse) "obstructs the development of theory that is intellectually interesting, empirically generative, or practically successful" (Healy, p 1). **Foucault is the Master Sommelier of historical philosophy; just as very detailed descriptions of wine have little connection to the actual taste, Foucault's detailed criticisms have little to do with historical writing (Healy, p 8).** Foucault intentionally creates grey areas and confusion for no real purpose other than to question our language skills. _"What is a book?"_ is not a helpful question and instead just confuses our perception of a definition (Foucault, p 23). While Foucault's criticism of œuvres is especially poignant in our new digital age, it still doesn't help us move forward with historiographical work or gain a better understanding of our world (Foucault, p 24).
