### So, What The Foucault? - A Commentary and Such

It is rather unfortunate that for today’s reading, we are assigned the role of commentators, rather than question-writers, for as I go through Foucault and the two selected passages, I am left with a plethora of questions, most of them to the effect of _“What the Foucault?”_ Seriously, this man – and these readings – embody everything I hate about pretentious philosophic scholarship entering the discipline of historiography. Furthermore, the assignment reminds me how passionately I disliked courses taken on philosophy. _”What the Foucault?”_

**Continuity and relativity** seem the be the points of highest importance throughout the selections. Questions of relativity are posed regarding one author to another, as well as an author’s specific work to another piece of theirs. Every book “is caught up in a system of references to other books, other texts, other sentences: it is a node within a network…its unity is variable and relative” (Discourse, p. 23). The observations of Foucault are both notable and relevant to the theme of the course. One must constantly evaluate a historian’s motives and the perspective from which they write. Naturally, historians will be influenced by others before them and the works they produced. By this, it is impossible to evaluate historiographical works without considering those that (directly or otherwise) influenced them. To the persisting question, _“What the Foucault?”_, the first answer arises: **all history and relevant works are relative and influenced by one another**. Continuity, the other point of importance, can be discussed through Foucault’s example of tradition (Discourse, p. 21). History strives to set a standard of comparison, just as tradition aims to do. Through this lens, historians are able to recognize significant events and notable aspects of history, against a backdrop of repetition and continuity. However, is Foucault suggesting that continuity and the relative nature of history be used as tools to decipher the past in future contexts, or is does he argue that each instance can or should be considered by itself, or at least more vigorously than when it was considered in the past since, after all, it is reoccurring and then potentially significant? Or does isolated occurrence mark significance, lending credence to the looking at a break of continuity? Once again, _”What the Foucault?”_

Foucault’s other work which was analyzed in the selection of readings, leaves me entrenched far deeper in the question of _”What the Foucault?”_, simply because I cannot wrap my head around the literature. While he talks of medicine, disease, allergies, and surgical procedures, following the series of analogies and its relation to (historiography) becomes increasingly difficult. Though one can appreciate the analysis of _primary specialization_ and _secondary specialization_ within medicine (Spaces and Classes, p. 10), it is harder to appreciate the big picture of his argument. Truly, _”What the Foucault?”_

8
