### Foucault: Language and Medicine
  **Michel Foucault discusses language and how it is used to aid our knowledge of all different topics.** Foucault mentions that intellectuals must **question the grouping systems that are so familiar and comfortable** (Archeology of Knowledge, p.22). Fouault points out that history is in fact just a grouping of references to other books (p.23). The oeuvre is questioned by Foucault as he examines whether this source of information can be added to by later historians. Language analysis is analyzed yet again by Foucault. By analyzing language and how writing is constructed, the intellectual is able to gain knowledge on how language can be manipulated in order to convey a certain point. He questions why certain statements are used over others (p.27). The **intentions of the author** are also questioned, as this affects the language used. Not only does Foucault analyze language but he also delves into the analysis of thought (p.27). Foucault examines how different statements are correlated (p.28). He concludes that **no statement has absolute validity** because every statement is affected by its time period (p.30--32). The final point Foucault makes in this article comes in the form of a question, **is it a danger for the historian to simply leave an analysis blank?**
  
  Foucault uses the second article to discuss **disease in relation to space.** One of Foucaults main points is that disease is spatialized in order to quarantine it (Birth of the Clinic, p.3). In the 18th century **disease is constituted by historical knowledge rather then by philosophical knowledge** (p.5). This then allows us to look into the writing process behind the history of disease itself. Given the severity of disease, **the historian must be very attentive to every small detail.** While delving into the history of disease, an organization or categorization takes place (p.7). Diseases are now organized according to rank, and symptoms of specific diseases are categorized.
  
  In closing, Michel Foucault aims at making the point that **linguistics are very important to the writing of any kind of history.** I found the fact that he aims to bring the importance of linguistics to light very interesting because this is not something I typically spend much thought on. However **the way in which we use specific terminology or statements is reflective of how we think.** Language reveals so much about both the authors intentions and the time period surrounding a specific topic. Both of the articles read by Foucault for today's class reflect what we discussed on poststructuralism. It is mentioned by Greene that **poststructuralism leads to "the linguistic turn"** at the enf of the 20th century (Greene, p.6760) and we see this when we read the articles by Foucault.

9
