## What the Foucault?

I read these passages over spring break, fully intending to ask what Foucault is even saying during office hours. When I found out the assignment for Wednesday was to do exactly that, my face must have been amusing to watch, as I was thoroughly confused throughout both works. Having read over it again, I can see that both works focus on continuity (although I am sure there will be wildly different views on Wednesday!). 

For Foucault, historians must cast aside prior notions of historical work. This includes tradition, influence, evolution, and spirit (Archeology of Knowledge, p. 21-22). In questioning these pillars of historiography, one must concern ourselves especially with the idea of the *book* and the *oeuvre*. Traditionally (one notion that must be eradicated!), history books have built upon each other, and as historians progressed through the 20th century, this **unity of sources has created a system where historical work is only built off past historical work**. When past methods become archaic, they are still being utilized due to the referential standard of historical work. For **Foucault, historians must start new, as the past is muddied with archaism**. Due to this, the concept of a *grand narrative* is not only impossible, but perhaps dangerous. 

While I can draw an overall thesis from *The Archeology of Knowledge*, I cannot from *Birth of the Clinic. On an individual level, I can follow his analogies and appreciate its relevance to his other reading. **Perceiving disease as a discontinuity, as it exists only in “one plane and one moment” due to the unique set of variables of the individual is exactly the argument he was making in Archeology** (*The Birth of the Clinic*, p. 6). However, when trying to find key points of this reading, I am at a loss for words. Thank you for titling this assignment “WTF”, because I found myself saying that frequently. 

Despite not grasping the overall reasoning for the *Clinic* reading, the most interesting part of this assignment for me was a quote: “In order to know the truth of the pathological fact, the doctor must abstract the patient” (The Birth of the Clinic, p. 8).  It’s a very simple and matter-of-fact statement that one can easily gloss over but has wide-reaching effects in this reading. **It works as a direct parallel to the historian**, who must utilize as much background information as possible, similar to how a doctor must know as much about his patient to accurately diagnose and treat them. The difference here is that history has no definitive end as a patient does. **History, in this scenario, has infinite ailments, and potentially infinite treatments**. Of course, Foucault could be inferring about something completely different, and it would not surprise me in the slightest. I hope to have a lot of questions answered on Wednesday! 
