# Interesting Points about Narrative
1. One of the most interesting points of the reading for me was the idea of trope introduced by Hayden White which concerns the linguistic concept of using language as a vehicle for meaning. (Munslow 16) This point is so crucial to the idea of narrative because it addresses the fundamental concept that **history is a entirely human centric study and therefor must take into account the most effective way to impart knowledge.** This to me can be seen as a expansion of the ideas of Vico.
2. Ankersmit's ideas of narrative substances which take into account the diluted nature of historical writing as a *representation* of a historical event or figure rather than a direct look into the event or person. This to me is something that is written about at length by theorists like Foucault and raises interesting questions on how we organize and classify what is "good" history. **The idea that you can only compare to representations or "narrative substances" to each other rather than the actual being or situation they claim to represent can fundamentally change how we classify a good history.** Once again it harkens back to Hayden White and the question of is a historians job more quantitative in nature or is the "message" we impart more important than the methodology used to reach it? Both sides can have large upsides as well as many cons so its interesting to think about.
3. In chapter 3 of NAH the idea of authorship is addressed as well as styles of narration such as intradiegetic which is the most common throughout modern historical writing. The idea of the author representing an ideological school vs their individual self is one that I find very interesting and useful when analyzing bias in historical writing. Yes, one author will have their own personal opinion shaped by a seemingly infinite combination of circumstances which made them the unique individual they are but trying to catalogue that would be madness, rather everyone has a bias or ideology or combination of such they embody which can be analyzed as to how they form their position. **The favoring of intradiegetic narration by academia historians lends to the notion that many modern students and historians hold which is that "unbiased" history is the pinnacle of historical method.** This chapter particularly interested me because of the bad name of historical bias and how our current method of not acknowledging the writers existence plays into that. For me **it is essential to audit your bias not to include all sides but to realize that a bias isn't bad. It is possible to have bias and be factual, if your bias is humanism and you are writing about the holocaust you can still have a factual piece of "good" history without taking into account Nazi beliefs and biases as legitimate entities.** To be biased against certain ideologies and world views is fundamentally good as the alternative is neutrality to the point of you saying nothing but a jumble of quantitative observations which neither accurately describe the event in context nor lend the reader any meaningful point. As history is a human discipline we as humans should be able to describe it in emotive and uniquely human terms and use its information to convey a constructive message to the reader. Without auditing your bias to ultimately convey a constructive message what is the point of writing a collection of observations about something that is already imperfect in its removed state and makes no attempt to appeal to the humanity of the reader?

3
