## Narrative and History

1.) I like that the introduction is **_very specific_** in outlining what the author is defining **history** as immediately, unlike some of the authors of the books and articles we have read. I appreciate that the author is direct that he will be treating history specifically as a "**narrative history**," and uses phrases like "**most likely truth**." This acknowledges that **the author knows there is bias in what he will be discussing**. This saves us, as readers, time by not forcing us to try to distinguish what things he expresses are biased, and **allows us to better consider and discuss his ideas** rather than try to figure out **what** they actually are _(p.1)_.

2.) I like the idea that **history is a result of narrative-making as much as it is about the events that happened** _(p.4)_. It's a lovely, simple way to express that **history is subjective**, and that **historians, as the ones that shape how history is preserved, have as much (if not more power) over how history occurs than the historical figures that shape and commit the events**. For example, if a leader wages a war and fails, the only way people in the distant future will know that they had a war is if the event was recorded. If they find the battle sight, but have no reccord of why soldiers and warriors died en masse at that location, then the finding is just a field of artifacts. The field would be full of disconnected facts, with no solidified tie into the greater narrative of the past. If a historian references it, however, we not only have an explanation of why there is a field of the dead, but we will know who they were, why they were there, and most likely, how they connect events of the past together.

3.) The description of history as "**fictive**" leaves me with mixed feelings. While I agree that **the only way to try to recover history 
is by creating a narrative about it**, I'm not sure that that inherently makes it "fiction." In my personal opinion, if there is a _devotion to as much corroborative evidence as possible_, then the narrative of history lies in a middle ground between absolute truth and pure fiction. I realizde this is vague, but it serves me well in my classifications of history. For me, the subjectivity is useful when considering _different types_ of history. For example, I tend to think of Nationalist histories as more fictional than not, because of the often obvious biases expressed within it. On the other hand, I tend to think more Professional and Enlightenment histories are more factual, because of the rigorous researching involved and the general scrutiny that goes into creating histories that strive so greatly to be "true." I further think that this grey area is the best we can hope for, since history is so subjective, but still conclude that "fictive" is too dissmissing of a term. (p.29).

4
