### Narrative and History

1. After reading about Hayden White in Popkin's book I did not enjoy his analysis of history. However, the explanation in Narrative and History made White's theories make a lot more sense. When Munslow described White's theory as "that history is history and fiction is fiction, but that both are narratives" (NaH, p 6) really made White's ideas clearer. I still disagree with Popkin's description and struggle with White's ideas but this book put White's criticism into a new light.

2. Munslow's three genres (reconstructionist, deconstructionist, constructionist) of history and five differences of deconstructionist history seemed excessive. I think that trying to add new categories of writing and biased. It creates a inner-competition between the categories of who is right and who is wrong. The author also clearly favors some of the genres more than others. He states that descontructionist thinking "encourages the possibility of radical and experimental history practice" (NaH, p 14). I wish he could have given more examples of the three types of genres and been less biased.

3. Something we've talked a lot about in class is if one can be objective, or if they should be and the general consensus lines up with Munslow's position pretty well; **"the point is all history is situated, positioned and for some thing or someone"** ( NaH, p 41). While I agree that you cannot completely remove yourself from what you're studying, the idea that all history is positioned for someone or something I find a little challenging. I am not saying he's wrong, just that there can be grey area. I do not believe that all history has a hidden agenda, but I do believe that all historians choose topics that are interesting to them and that can be attributed to political/religious/ethical viewpoints. It was a concept that sounds really obvious, but the more I thought about it, the less I agreed completely with Munslow. Again, it comes down to the question of how much intention influences history and how to respond to that intention. **If all history is situated, is all history then biased?** 

3
