## Points of Interest from *Narrative and History* Reading (Intro-Ch. 2, p. 1-43). 

- Munslow’s clear distinction between past and history accurately describes the phenomena historians have shifted towards in the later 20th century. Looking at how “the past exists not only as a form of created phenomena” radically alters the job of the historiographers, and provides justification for the narrative turn in history (Munslow, p. 9)

- In Chapter one, Munslow displays diagrams of how narrative is consisted of story and discourse (p. 21). Discourse is split up by six further narrative devices. Interestingly, he moves plot to the story side of narrative. Do you agree with Munslow’s decision? **Or do you consider plot a part of discourse** as Gerard Genette did in 1983?

- Munslow outlies three questions that philosophers of history ask themselves. One asks, “what is the proper structure of historical explanation” (p. 33)? This question has been the subject of intense historical debates since the 1980’s (and even earlier with the Annales/Rankean methods contending for “truth”), what is your personal preference? Looking past methodologies, does the rigid structure of events even matter? Hayden White rejects general causation that implies a course of “beginning, middle, and end” as the same event can provide multiple purposes depending on which *story* or *narrative* is being followed (p. 38).  **Should we only be concerned of an event from within the narrative that is being created, and not from its own self-entity?**
