Comment
The way history is often taught in the west implies that the history of western thought was born in Greece and then through Roman help was disseminated across Europe and continued to develop into what we today know as Western philosophy. As we have discussed previously the way history is written has a profound impact on how that history is interpreted and effectively how it impacts modern times when read. As is clear in the Pipkins reading the debate over what way history should be written is nothing new. Both Herodotus and Thucydides were concerned with overall accuracy but had differing opinions on how much creative license and how much anecdote a historian can take into their overall writing. (Pipkins 27) While accuracy is certainly important in history presentation also has a major role and a historian has an ethical responsibility in how something is presented. Because dry facts rarely elicit a response from readers as well as the fact that large historical texts are usually only accessible or accessed by the ivory tower intelligencia the way in which history is transmitted as a story is often the most critical part in having it understood even today. FTHT points out that Polybius the Roman historian would have only been accessed in his time by wealthy intellectuals and later by a similar class of renaissance wealthy intellectuals, with most of the population learning history through oral tradition. (Pipkins 33) It would be easy for someone educated to automatically side with Thucydides’ methodology as the inclusion of myth in Herodotus’ work makes it less accurate in a cut and dry sense. However when one considers how many Historical inaccuracies or un-nuanced whole or half truths are widely believed due to dissemination in mass media a Historian must consider that for themselves to have an impact perhaps Herodotus’ use of entertainment as well as myth which often reflects larger societal beliefs is one that has validity for its effectiveness. For example in the Kelley reading a quote from the Roman historian Florus is included in which he states to study the history of Rome is to study the History of the whole world, Kelley remarks that this can be seen as a hallmark of many Eurocentric historians in the Western canon. It can be argued that the lessons Roman historians took from Herodotus on narrative and the permissibility of hearsay (which was especially important due to the size of their Empire and its historical span) made their history so long lasting and partially explains why modern students are inundated from elementary school on with how important Roman history is. If Romans had simply chronicled facts in a strictly Thucydian method only on subjects related to their own lives perhaps Roman history might be discarded into one week of class time as Egyptian history which spanned centuries often is because the Egyptians did not concern themselves with recorded narrative or the idea of a unified historical record.
