### FHTH 25-35
Historiography, a term that was coined relatively recently, has deep roots in ancient Greek history. Many ancient Greek historians weaved religious and mythical beliefs into their narratives, leading later historians to discredit their work. However, the value of these histories does not lie in their accuracy, but rather the in customs surrounding the methodologies of the study of history. 

Herodotus, one of the most influential ancient Greek historians, was “denounced as ‘the father of lies’ because of the many tall tales he incorporated” (Popkin p. 29). Herodotus’s method of studying history, his own historiography, was that of in depth analysis on differing cultures and people groups. This information is incredibly valuable to modern historians, but his methodology is what would create Herodotus’s lasting legacy. A trait taken over by the Romans, and then by many historians following, was that of the narrative history that included more than just dry facts. Herodotus used “method suggested that all aspects of human life could potentially be of historical interest”, which would later lead Cicero to declare Herodotus the “father of history” (Popkin p. 28). Herodotus’s ability to combine dry historical facts with an enthralling story is still a very prominent characteristic of modern historiography. Even if Herodotus’s histories were not always factual, they were very telling of culture of the time, and were vital enough to last throughout the centuries. 

The rhetoric used by these historians is also incredibly important. The study of history can be clouded by the rhetoric used by the historians themselves. Thucydides’ cut and dry histories have just as much value as Herodotus’s use of “poetic license” in his histories (Kelley p. 68). Both of their rhetorical styles contribute and retract from the worth of these histories, and help cement the styles that would be passed onto future historians throughout the ages. The later historiography surrounding these ancient works would also study and imitate the rhetoric used. Throughout history, the ancient greats have been looked upon as a model for future histories, creating a lasting legacy that is greater than the accuracy of their histories. The differing styles and multitude of historical works are what would lead to the lasting legacy of Herodotus and Thucydides. As Popkin states, “[t]he works of Herodotus and Thucydides provided important models for subsequent historians in the ancient Greek and Roman world and for their successors ever since” (p. 29).
