1. Thucydides had the foresight of telling the story of the complications and failures, including his own, of the Peloponnesian War in hopes that lessons might be learned in future conflicts. Yet still today these mistakes are still apparent in modern U.S. conflicts. Should there be higher value placed on historical lessons when nations take on these kind of endevaours? Why are these lessons so often ignored? (H to H-Net p.28)
2. Thucydides work has been scrutinized for his liberties in using his own words to convey speeches that were not his own, most notably the speech of the Athenian leader Pericles honoring the fallen Greeks following the Peloponnesian War. This practice is still prominent today in the way that Hollywood takes liberties when adapting historical narratives to the big screen to enhance the drama and characters of these events. This is an affective method in engaging the masses to the importance of a historical event, but can also blur the lines of history and fiction. When are these liberties excusable? When do they go too far? (H to H-Netp.29)
3. Julius Ceasar's memoir _Gallic Wars_ and Plutarch's _Parrallel Lives_ biography of notables figures from Greek and Roman history further innovated the field of history by adding a more human element and perspective. This allowed readers to not just understand what had happened, but to have a better understanding of the thought process and context of the people who were there. What level of importance shoudl these perspectives share alongside more broad second hnad accounts of these histories? (H to H-Net pp.32-33)
4. Roman Historian Stallust asserted that " Writing History is a difficult job: in the first place because what you put down has to correspond exzactly to the facts; and secondly because if you permit yourself to criticize any wrongdoing , most of your readers will think you are melevolent, or even envious" (FoH p.53). Do Stallust's words still denote one of the primary challenges for historians today? 
