### Herodotus & Thucydides, It's All Greek (and Roman) to Me - Questions

1. Is there value in a 'Herodotus' approach to historiography (Popkin p. 28) in which poetic license is taken in order to enhance historical accounts and convey a particular message? Is Harry's nickname, "The Father of Lies" (Popkin p. 29), justified or too critical?
2. Thucydides, a staunch supporter of primary sources, admitted to taking certain liberties when recounting the speeches of great leaders (Popkin, p. 29). When evaluating historical record, how critical should historians be toward the accuracy of an account versus the intended theme? Do standards and expectations change as documenting technology improves?
3. Aristotle claims philosophy and poetry are superior to history because of their accessibility to general truth rather than reliance on 'accidental sequence of events' (Popkin pp. 30-31). While he acknowledges the relationship between empirical facts and history, does Aristotle's assertion then support a preference for Herodotus' style of historiography versus Thucydides'. Can these two styles exist in concert?
4. Polybius' arguments on governmental functions in Rome demonstrate the time-sensitivity of historical interpretation (Popkin p. 32; Kelley p. 52). Roman Historian Sallust observes: "Writing history is a difficult job... what you put down has to correspond exactly to the facts... if you permit yourself to criticize any wrongdoing, most of your readers will think that your are malevolent, or even envious" (Kelley p. 53).
Is history constantly evolving? If so, is the acceptance of historical "fact" merely compromising for the best (or most palatable) interpretation available?
