# FHTH & Roman Foundations Discussion Questions

- Both Herodotus and Thucydides agreed that history should only be of exceptional events of importance (Popkin, p. 27-28). Even Roman historians Tacitus and Ammianus Marcellinus believed “the task of history is to deal with prominent events” (Roman Foundations p. 64). With modern context and the increased emphasis on the history of common lives, would you say that is still the case? Why or why not? 
- Herodotus was well known for his accounts of history that included different cultures and fable elements (Popkin p. 28). Thucydides solely focused on the “fighters and the founders” of important wars and political situations and left out nearly every other aspect of Greek life (Roman Foundations p. 56). Which of the two would you consider the *truer* history, or rather the one you would source first?
- For a time, Romans had been compared to the Greeks as “culturally deprived” due to “lacking not only a Herodotus and Thucydides… but also a Homer” (Roman Foundations, p. 55). Besides Livy, who is compared on the same level to the three Greeks, has there been anyone since that has made such a definitive impact on a societies history?
- Lucian believed that Thucydides was the model historiographer due to his deep understanding of events themselves, and being able to convey **why** individuals acted the way they did (Roman Foundations p.65). Considering our talk last class about chronology and the importance of **why**, would you say this focus on rhetoric is necessary in modern history?
- While Popkin and Kelley cite the great Greek and early Roman historians, they also mention their disciples, including Polybius, Titus Livius, Sallust, and Quintilian. These authors mentioned these historians to compare how they evolved the study of history in their day. Which of these second-wave historians would you say made the most definitive impact on historiography? 
