## Historiography During the Late 20th Century

- The social changes in the 1960s led to **movements at universities to expand history courses to cover events and historical topics that were directly affected by current issues.** This *"new history"* approach was led by students who wanted a new way of studying and thinking about history. Such as classes on the history of Vietnam and **histories of women and other minorities that were previously ignored**  **(p.129)**.

- As historians looked to study different histories form new perspectives they also worked to link it more closely with the "hard" social sciences of economics, sociology and demography **(p.131)**. The emphasis on **data was first hailed as a great new tool in historiography** but it also had it issues such as the work of Robert Fogel and Stanley Engerman's study on American slavery that resulted in many historians losing faith in quantitative history. Their study was based on little and poor evidence and showed how data can give a conclusion, that is incorrect.  **(p.133)**.

- The historian Lynn Hunt's book *Politics, Culture, and Class in the French Revolution* used both cliometric quantitative and analysis of language and rhetoric to look at different parts of the French Revolution **(p.133-134)**. While Hunt showed how her thinking and approach to historiography changed during the writing of the book it was criticized for not covering figures like Mirabeau and Robespierre or the Declaration of the Rights of Man and the Reign of Terror **(p.142)**.

- Micheal Foucault's views on language and discourse draw attention to how it was society's view of people and their's behavior that changed over time not their behavior itself. Another area in which Foucault was very influential and changed how historians looked and wrote history, **was in the power relations behind every human interaction**. He argued that politics and power was not just "exercised by governments and leaders" but also formed *"micropolitiecs"* or *"biopoliitics"* or a level of control at in every part of human life. **This challenged the the idea that politics and social history were separate.** That social history was history without without politics. *However, Foucault was a philosopher not a historian and many historians have taken issue with his methods and his failure to show how things changed.* **(P.137-138)**

- Microhistory or the study of everyday life that focused on a limited time and space and usually involved unknown minor historical figures. **Microhistory was developed by scholars from Italy,** including "Carlo Ginzburg, whose study of a sixteenth-century village miller in the *The Cheese and the Worms* 1976," set the idea of a what microhistory was. Microhistory is also a contrast from the grand histories such as the ones favored by Fernand Braudel and the *Annales* school. **(p.140)**

- It was during the 1980s that historians and the general public began to look at history as part of a collective national memory, or history of memory. *The idea was first explored by the French sociologist, Maurice Halbwachs* but his work did not receive much attention until the 1980s. **The idea is that sites of memory can be almost anything. A physical objects, rituals such as celebrating a national holiday, a sporting event, a particular book or film, a country's flag or actual sites of remembrance.** The rise in interest in historical memory happened at the same time that people began to have a greater interest in historical sites and museums. *It was also when the history wars were according between academic historians and scholars and the history that most of the general public consumed, which differed greatly in the sources used and how people simply saw historical events.* **(p.149-151)**

- The history Wars were the debate between historians and the general public who did not like that history was not focusing on microhistory and the history of people and groups perviously ignored. It also at this time that the importance and reach of mass media in shaping how the public viewed historical events. The public's issues with having multiple narratives of the past, that did not always have a *good or bad guys*. **(p.153-162)**
