### Popkin's 20th Century Overview

-	The 1960s were a time of radical social change not only in the United States and the West, but across the globe. Building on the earlier movement inspired by Marx, **demand was high for alternative perspectives and a new historiography regarding the role of women and minorities**. From purists like Ranke to innovators like Schorske, no historian was above criticism and questioning. New challenges arose as to where historians’ work stopped and other disciplines began; and who was entitled to teach certain topics, as was prompted by white scholars, like Eugene Genovese, teaching the history and legacy of North American slavery (Popkin pp. 127-131).

-	Technological breakthroughs led to a rise in quantitative history, which provided a _new lens to historiography_. The study of history took on a new scientific approach that, in many ways, furthered the legitimacy of the field. This _data-heavy history was not without its criticisms_, however. Even amongst _Annalists_, thought to be the modern forefather of quantitative history, skepticism was prevalent. Exemplifying the limits of quantitative history, some noted that **numbers alone cannot express the pain felt by victims** (Popkin pp. 130-133).

-	In contrast to the push for quantification and ‘harder science’ in history, _Metahistorians_ emerged and challenged the entire credibility of their field. Lynn Hunt and (especially) Thomas Kuhn gave rise to the notion that **history was merely a matter of perspective and _paradigm shifts_**. Rather than improving data over time, Kuhn argued that history was simply a reflection of developing perspectives of how society functions. Michel Foucault similarly argued that a historian’s **framework was perhaps the cause, not the result of changing history**. From this, scholars began to question the validity of “Eurocentric” perspectives, which had been so widely accepted as truest. Hayden White’s advocacy of _Metahistory_ perhaps caused the biggest stir in the historical community with his assertions that **historiography was little more than fictitious interpretations of the past** (Popkin pp. 133-138).

-	From Foucault to Friedan, women, sexuality, and gender became topics of interest and exploration within the historical discipline. Whereas the first wave of feminism of the late nineteenth century advocated for basic rights and political representation, the second wave of feminism of more than a half-century later called for equality and opportunity for women. Both **feminist history and the rising interest in racial studies opened the door for more cross-over between historical studies and that of sociology as well as anthropology**. (Popkin pp. 142-146).

-	_Calling Western historiography into question took the forefront of academic discussion_ with critics like Edward Said leading the way. While academics like Said and Marshall Sahlins brought important concerns to light regarding Eurocentric domination in the historic record, they themselves fall into some of the same patterns that lump otherwise disjointed groups together. Historians like Dipesh Chakrabarty advocated a more moderate approach, recognizing the distortions and influence of Western historiography, while suggesting that **every culture has its limitations and it was most important that historians are aware and take this into consideration than discredit Western history** (Popkin pp. 146-149).

-	Conflict exists in the field of historical memory. _While, traditionally, firsthand accounts are given priority amongst historians, not all memory is necessarily “true” or “accurate”_. As historians are often responsible for telling the emotional stories of others, simply (one can hope) with the assistance of “facts”, it can be contentious when having to confront someone whose memory of an event – particularly a traumatic one – is not consistent with the “facts”. Italian historian Alessandro Portelli nevertheless argues that **‘false’ oral accounts are not wrong and can actually be as valuable to the historical record as factually reliable accounts** (Popkin pp. 149-153).

-	‘Wars’ permeate throughout the world of historiography. The public is often far less interested in the truth than with a familiar narrative. In response to this, **some historians advocate that a distorted knowledge of history is better than none at all**, and are complicit in trends of historical fiction passed off as reliable narrative. Within communities, historians argue over the importance of nationalistic histories and to what extent “true” and often cynical narratives erode a society’s cohesion. Conversely, and of equal importance, historians debate the destructive and corruptive nature of misguided narratives. The debates are not likely to end in the near future. (Popkin pp. 153-162).
