# Summary Renaissance Historiography 
* Historians in the Renaissance period such as Lorenzo Valla simultaniously distanced themselves from their medieval counterparts while also predicting many of the trends that would form modern "scientific" historiography. (Popkin 48-49)
* A critical component to Valla and his contemporaries' methodology is that it shifted from the traditional academic paradigm of the time and instead sought to re examine the accepted narratives using mroe scrutiny of sources and early antiquarianism. (Popkin 49-50)                                                                                                            
*  Macchiavelli's radical shift from medieval political history writing to a new more humanist and secular one would prove pivotal in a larger shift in renaissance historiography. Medieval politcal history was often heavily embelished at the behest of religious and political patrons, but Machiavelli's writing was more realistic, source based and fair. While he didnt openly criticize many Florentine political leaders he did insinuite their failings which was not how political history had been recorded previously. (Popkin 51)
* Changing political landscapes and the rise of consolodated monarchic nation states was one of the reasons Medieval historical practice became irrelevant. Another crucial development came in the mid 16th century by the Magdeburg Centuries whom changed the way history was organized on a timeline by creating a timeline neutral to the reign of dynasties or religious events and calenders. These advancements in methodology as well as the critical invention of the printing press int he mid 15th century pushed historiography into a new era during the renaissance. (Popkin 53)
* Spurred by the crucial invention of the printing press many innovations in how historical knowledge was disseminated followed suit, In the 16th century historical theater began to become very popular thanks to playwrights like William Shakespeare. In the 17th century historical periodicals were introduced as well as the first antiquarian museums opened. (Popkin 55) 
* Important breakthroughs in the philosophy Historiography were made during the enlightenment. Giambattista Vigo's analysis of what seperates human social studies from that of science are still ones that are essential to modern scientific historical philosophy. Englightenment historians were even more conscious of using documents to bolster their arguments now that printing had existed for several centuries. Enlightenment historians also began the practice of analysing historical trends and the loops in which events repeat themselves. As a time of philisophical diversification among all fields of study the enlightenemnt radically changed how people correlated historical events with human nature. (Popkin 57-61)
* Three critical British historians of the early modern period Robertson, Gibbon and Hume all exemplified what we know as the historiographry of the early modern era. Their work divorced itself from religious establishments and held the optimistic view that humanity was steadily progressing towards and enlightened future. (popkin 62-64)
*   Johann Gottfried von Herder's criticisms of the Condorcet's proposed methodology for studying history were an important foundational step for ideas of relativism and eliminating western bias that are at the forefront of Historical debate today. Popkin finishes the chapter by pointing out that historians like Herder had many modern qualities to their methodology and the work done in the renaissance and early modern period was pivotal in the formation of modern historiographical practice. However these historians still perpetuated ideas and methods that today we would considedr wholly antiquated and our historiography has changed significantly from their period. (Popkin 65-67)
9:careful that bullets don't get too complicated; use markdown formatting to highlight most important aspects
