## I'll take my history with a side of compassion, thanks 

Giambattista Vico's (1668-1744) societal progression theory of history is incredibly bleak (p. 60). Instead of Disney's version of history seen on the ride *Carousel of Progress*, his depiction of the rise of civilization does not forfeit the inevitable decline. Would the Romans have ruled differently had they known they were going to decline? More importantly, is history *important* in that kind of society? This cycle of society theory challenges history in many ways because if decline is inevitable, why keep records? 

According to Vico, there is **growth and decay**, a natural progression of any living entity. Society is constantly evolving through three **specific** stages. Stage one is people's belief in supernatural powers, "*an age of the gods*". Stage two is where those gods become elites who claimed "*supernatural origin*" and gain authority. Stage three is the "*age of men and human government*" (p. 60). Societies would then eventually collapse, with new nations taking their place. This is perceived as the inevitable cycle of society with **no** progression over time. Surprisingly, his theory was not a big hit with Renaissance thinkers, but became a utilized theory in the centuries following. 

If all past societies have gone through this same cycle, then there is *no point* to history. There is no learning from the past and no improvement for the future. Everything becomes quite bleak in this world Vico has painted, and it is something I want no part of. This is not an accurate depiction of history. There is *gradual* improvement and a continuously evolving standard of humanity that occurs within society. How would history be recorded if decline was inevitable? Wouldn't the past records prove this as a fact, and then proper steps could be taken to **avoid** falling apart? (Is that what we are facing now?) We learn from the past and apply it to our future. We understand the brutality and horrors of the Roman Empire and Nazi Germany and slavery in the United States so we can **avoid** making those same mistakes. Is history important to the kind of society that simply succumbs to the cyclical nature of things? Learning about the past holds **no value** if we follow Vico's three stages. Societies grow and expand, along with our knowledge as time progresses. We have more access to knowledge now than we ever did in the past. There is no excuse anymore. 

8: very provocative with interesting questions, but could use a more focused argument.

