### Emily Delcoure
# A Reformation of History and Man:
## and Other Logical Fallacies


The Renaissance of Europe has been described as a modernizing time for intellectuals as well as the general public, when in reality it was not. Not that it was not more modern than the years prior to the early modern period, and the fact that they were conscious of the differences between themselves and their ancestors proves them self-aware *to some extent* (p. 49). There was a revolution, as Popkin refers to it, of ideologies---that perhaps other people's histories mattered to be written about---but that does not a revolutionary period make (p. 47-67). The idea that the early modern period was more than just a stepping stone that included just as much ignorance and blind religious faith as the previous periods can be seen best in Popkin's use of  Enlightenment Era historians, breakthroughs, and terminology to underscore the finer points of this chapter (p. 48, 61). A revolutionary period of history would have been a combination of the Renaissance and the Enlightenment, an event to so magically advanced that the men--and women--that participated would be immediately immortalized by their collegues, and it would not have occured in Europe---the ever-advancing "center" of the Early Modern Era.
The ways of writing history were revolutionized; to write with purpose and intent instead of monotonous chronologies was truly **groundbreaking**. But the idea that man, around the world, rich and poor felt the tremors of this earth-shattering transformation in writing is absurd (p. 52). The men writing on history in the fifteenth century were the same ones that read it, literacy--while at an all time high--was by no means widespread and it certainly wasn't bettering the lives of anyone poorer than Niccolo Machiavelli. While I am well aware of the fact that Jeremy Popkin is focused mainly on the revolutionary way in which man began critically thinking about its own history *as it was unfolding*, the critical thinking within this chapter leaves much to be desired. Because there was an individual historian in Mesoamerica that wrote critically on the history of his civilization's creation did not mean that writing was published across Europe---an isolated event does not constitute a notation of widespread advancement (p. 52). In short, the logical fallacy of confined intellectual success equating a revolutionary period of historical proportions is unmistakably diluting the other great points Popkin has attempted to make about Early Modern Italian historians.
