***What Historiographical Revolution?*** 

**Updated**

Popkin stated that the early-modern period brought both “scientific methods” and new mediums for communication to the history profession but little progress was actually made in bring “objective history” (Popkin, p. 48). Despite Popkin’s claims of progress, mainstream historians, in the early-modern period, used their work to articulate and **promote a political viewpoint**. Published in 1439-1440, the historical work "Discourse on the Forgery of Constantine" by the Italian scholar Lorenzo Valla claimed the document supposedly written by Emperor Constantine that gave the Pope dominion over Rome in the 4th century was a fabrication (Popkin, p. 48). Protestant historians published the Magdeburg Centuries to discredit the Catholic Church by exposing its corruption to the public. In seventeenth century France, Cardinal Bossuet published the "Universal History" to promote the ideology “of the absolute power of the French king, Louis XIV” (Popkin, p. 57). **How are these early-modern historians any more professional than Roman nationalist historians**, such as Livy, that used their works to champion the glory of Rome (Popkin, p. 35)? Instead of studying history to provide an objective presentation of the past, historians used their word to benefit their political and religious philosophies. 

The only thing new about the history profession’s early-modern was the influx of technologies that gave historians more powerful tool to promote their political agenda. The emergence of theatrical plays, newspapers and widespread historical works gave elites in government greater influence over their countries. Politicians and kings could use plays like "Julius Caesar" to show their citizens the danger of anarchy and coup d'etat (Popkin, p. 55). Liberal Enlightenment leaders published popular historical works that manipulated the past to bring a sense of progress and science to the world (Popkin, p. 60). **The development of these technologies did not bring revolution to the content of history but only its presentation.** 

Popkin describes the early-modern period as a time of great improvement for historians but the record he presents tells a different narrative. Despite his optimistic tone in the chapter, Popkin even outlines how early-modern historians were **unable to separate “scholarly and popular history”** in this period because the study of history was deeply political (Popkin, p. 67). Since historians were not able to separate even “scholarly and popular history,” how could we call this a “historical revolution?” The early-modern era is just an extension of Classical, Medieval and Renaissance history because historians were still **unable to establish an “objective” study of history.** In solidarity with previous historical works, **early-modern historians used history as a tool for politics.**


6: almost entirely summary, rather than an original and specific argument. Although you start to hint at one towards the end, it's not really about the reading itself.
