## Western History Stops Being Explicitly Christian
### (But we're still sort of ignoring the Eastern World)

History in the Renaissance, or the Early Modern period, shifts away from being a religious venture into something that tried to keep track of humanity in a more non-biased way. Popkin phrases it as a **"new, secularly oriented humanist history" (p. 51)**. This is important because this is a birth of one of the more popular theories on how we try to tell history in the Modern Era: modern historians tend to write societal histories by giving more equal attention to politics, war, religion, law, and social aspects of history rather than write history in a way that is biased towards important religious events.

The big event that the text presents as the starting point of this shift was Lorenzo Valla's work proving that the "donation of Constantine," the document supposedly proving that Constantine, the Roman Emperor, _gave_ Rome to the Pope, was a forgery **(p. 48)**. This is a very, very important moment: this disproving of a previously accepted fact directly disagrees with Christian history, which up until this point, was not how history was written. **Before this, historians sought to record the "truth," but not in a way that disagreed with Christianity**. Even histories written before this moment that were not explicitly Christian tended to rely on ecclesiastical events. The major events recorded in each of the versions of the Anglo-Saxon Chronicle, for example, tend to be focused on when kings and Popes come into power and when they died. By disproving the Pope's claim to Rome, Valla set a precedent that history does not have to agree with religion.

History widely being written from a secular point of view can also be credited in part to the invention and use of the **printing press**. Popkin notes that it made history expanded "historical knowledge," which definitely contributed to the way people of the 1400s understood history, but he doesn't thoroughly discuss the _impact_ it had. Before the printing press, the knowledge of history that _the common people_ had was learned _directly from the Catholic Church_. Biblical history of the ancient world was preached at church, but only wealthy people had access to the few manuscripts of other kinds of history that there were. And these manuscripts were held in libraries, where there were only a few copies **(p. 53)**. The ability to produce massive quantities of books that came with the printing press allowed people to buy and take these new secular histories home with them, and read them for themselves- which thoroughly moved the distribution of history out of the hands of the Church and allowed people to examine history in this new secular manner.
