# Historiographical Revolution of the Early Modern Era

### (I want to hear more about native writers and scholars!)

I enjoyed Popkin's analysis of the historical writings and thoughts for the "early modern era"; he expressed the innovations and shifts in historical analysis in a way that was compelling for me as a reader, particularly since the "Renaissance" used to be my favorite time period to study (I may have had a slight obsession with Galileo and Leonardo Da Vinci). However, while reading I was again drawn to the thought that history and historiography are still lacking a perspective other than the Western European one and Popkin did little in this chapter to persuade me otherwise. 

Popkin has noted in previous chapters that most history and historical analysis has lacked a worldly perspective in the general histories that we rely on and yet he does just this throughout most of the chapter! The point that bothered me the most was Popkin’s discussion about the **"discovery of the New World"** greatly affecting intellectual thought of the "early modern era" through the "Age of Enlightenment" (pg 47). Now, I know full well that Popkin meant "discovery" in terms of what the Europeans of the era felt about finding what was new land to them and not actually new lands. It still plays to the old rhetoric that the history of the Americas didn’t really begin until Western Europe began talking about it. Columbus was not the first to "discover" the Americas nor were the Norseman before him. **The Americas had already been thriving for centuries** with cultures who had their own rich histories and traditions. Yet, even today these cultures are barely touched upon in the general histories of the world. 

Now, to give Popkin some credit, he does devote a several paragraphs to early modern historians who did discuss the native populations of the Americas. **Bartolomé de La Casas, Poma, El Inca Govalasco de la Vega (two Incan nobles), and Bernardino de Sahagun** all had "considerable influence on later accounts of the history of Spanish America" (pg. 51, 52). That's the kicker though, "Spanish America", not the history of the Americas from the perspective of the Cherokee, the Sioux, or the Aztecs themselves. The history of the Americas mainly came from the accounts of those conquering over the lands and native peoples (i.e. John Smith, *A True Relation of Such Occurrences and Accounts of Note as Happened in Virginia*, pg. 56). When Popkin mentioned the Mexican historian, **Francisco Clavijero** and his, *Historia antigua de México*, I was excited. Yes! Let's hear more about him and historians like him! A breath of fresh air to contradict the European smoke (pg 63). Popkin quickly moved on to discuss German writers. Oh well...

Now to be fair, the discussion of the history of native populations of the Americas as well as other cultures around the world is not what this chapter was about, and it is somewhat unreasonable of me to criticize Popkin for not saying more than he already did in this chapter. That being said, statements like, "the discovery of America forced historians to confront the problem of integrating its past into their picture of the development of mankind' still evokes a very Western European mindset and viewpoint. I can only hope Popkin will use later chapters to address more fully the alternate historical perspectives from the rest of the world. He definitely has shown more potential than some of his contemporaries. 

9: very nice. only suggestion is to briefly mention how popkin continually gives us snippets of other historiographies (Chinese, Islamic, etc) but rarely do we get the same analytical treatment, detail, or significance as the western tradition. So it's an open question if he should balance them out (and make the book longer) or focus it on the western tradition (and be more lopsided). 
