# **_The Paradigm Shift of Post-modernism_**

**_Postmodern_** history is a profound historiographical paradigm shift,which reflects the break or changing of the core, or most common central viewpoints of past historians and philosophers, from one that focuses on meta-narratives and ideologies of **_modernism._** Skepticism and rejection occurred of *universalistic* notions, or general application of concepts such as truth, human nature, and social progress. *Meta-narratives,* or a master idea of humanity, has been the main *Euro-centric* or Western-dominated concept, which has frequently left out the complex nature of humanity. The concept of a *"paradigm-shift"* described by **_Thomas Kuhn,_** expresses that history consists of reflections of sudden and somewhat inexplicable changes, rather than history or science as a linear accumulation of new knowledge.(Popkin, 134) This postmodern shift was a significant change in historical thought, which sought to incorporate smaller, under-represented histories of marginalized groups or sporadic moments in time. Historian **_Hayden White_** focused on the linguistic nature of historical narratives and their status as cultural constructs.(Popkin, 137) French Philosopher Jean-Francois Lyotard wrote that cultural and economic changes in the world have made it impossible to cast history in the form of a "grand narrative," in which all developments were fitted into a coherent overall framework; such as the narratives provided by the *Enlightenment* and *Marxist* historical approaches.

**_Deconstruction_** and **_post-structuralism_** are concepts expressed within and creating *postmodern* thinking, in that thinkers moved away from strict interpretations of structuralist ideas. There had become more emphasis on the various aspects of specific cultures and individuals. The generation of a *"people's history,"* reflected the diversification of history and the narratives of individuals and groups of individuals that had been previously excluded. These concepts had been slowly-developing and a continuum of enlightened thinking, yet the agency gained was a major break and shift in historical and philosophical thought. Historian **_Edward Said_** epitomized the shift from Euro-centric, Western perspectives within his work _Orientalism,_ in which he describes the impact upon which Western thinkers had dominated the histories of many non-Western peoples; denying them individual or group agency. He described historical scholarship as "a Western style for dominating, restructuring, and having authority over the Orient."(Popkin, 146) **_Depesh Chakrabarty_**, much like *Said,* expressed the need, but ultimate inability to decentralize the Western narrative through **_subaltern histories._**

**_Said_** and **_Chakrabarty_** created and spread postmodern awareness of the domination of "grand narratives" and Western-dominated thought, which ultimately reflects the continuum of Western domination, despite a growing body of non-Western histories and historians. Although colonialism had generally ceased, the impact and cultural remnants reflected the lasting effect it had on historiography. The inclusion of histories of non-Western peoples, as well as, histories of gender and sex, also reflect the drastic break or rupture in the typically male-centered, western-dominated narratives. Feminist history, post-colonial history, and a general history-from-below, gave voices to social groups, previously excluded and has provided a broader and more holistic view of humanity. **_Joan Kelly_** provides a historical analysis of patriarchy and "raised the consciousness of the historical profession regarding the status of women's history and women historians.(Green and Troup, 263) An example of indigenous history is relfected within **_White Buffalo Woman,_** which critiqued American depiction of indigenous populations.(Green and Troup, 335) Postmodern thinking reflected a major paradigm shift in the scope and the general importance of people and approaches previously excluded or altered to fit the political, Western, male perspective. Although postmodern thinkers have generated an awareness of the problems which arise in Western-perspectives and overarching grand-narratives, I do feel like those approaches should not be completely abandoned or seen as the "wrong" way to approach history. All facets of past historical methods and those of postmodern thinking, should be intertwined to reflect both the dominated and the dominator, the male and female perspective, and the micro and macro historical narratives. 
