# Postmodernism 

Our readings have honestly made me think about history in a way I had never considered before.  The past two weeks was the *first time* I've **ever read Foucault** and considered the postmodern approach to history. *I still cannot say I understand what I've read*, but I do find it an interesting way to consider history. Postmodernism does not have an overall narrative, which is different from the previous histories we have looked at. I think that is an important distinction between the two periods, and perhaps the "rupture" we are looking for. 

The desire to deconstruct texts and focus on the significance, and also what is *excluded* from the text was a revolutionary change to the study of history. One cannot take a text at face-value any longer, and therefore history *cannot* be verified. Postmodernism is a historiographical paradigm shift; it was a unique way to study the past that *revolutionized* the way we understand history. It is no longer verifiable,  but the way history has been written is a direct result of imperialism. There are *no truths* anymore, which flipped the academic world upside-down. 

I think this period of writing history was foundational to our modern conceptions of the past. It is necessary to analyze and deconstruct the way we read our histories, because everything we considered a *fact* (within history) is fluid and up to interpretation. The postmodern period also provoked nationalist histories, which only served to push a specific narrative. In that sense, postmodernism pushed individual study. It also forced historians to analyze nationalist histories with the knowledge of an agenda behind it. It looks at what is said, the way it is said, and more importantly what is not said about *marginalized groups of people* that were never before considered. It allowed a voice for the voiceless. Gender was considered a lense in which to view history, which alone was revolutionary. The idea of the patriarchy was considered for the first time and social structures that enforced these ideas were *being written about*. 

Postmodernism was an important change in history because it answered the questions people were unaware they were asking; *why*, *why*, *why* is everything the way it is? Why are textbooks written the way they are? How do women fit into the overall narrative? How do African-Americans, Native Americans, people of color, fit into the narrative? *Why* should we care about *the way* we write about those groups of people? 
These are questions that still need to be answered, but I feel that postmodernism has the best methodology to answer them. 