Elena Farmin

Postmodernism So Far

The readings on postmodern history have changed the way that I think about history, especially with regards to why Popkin titled his chapter on historiography in the second half of the twentieth century “Glorious Confusion.” Nowhere was that more apparent than when I read the selections by Michel Foucault (my inner thoughts: “What did I just read?”). The methods developed by postmodernist historians can be confusing, or even overwhelming, but at least there are plenty of options to choose from. People will find certain methods more appealing than others, but they can still find one that will make them understand a theme or topic better, or prove more useful when doing their own historical research and writing. 

One example of this is recent approaches to gender in historical analysis, as described in the Joan Scott article and The Houses of History chapter. Mainly these approaches deal with analyzing gender as a cultural and social construct. To analyze it from the perspective of sex, which is unchanging, would imply that gender was also unchanging. Ideas concerning gender have changed throughout history, as have culture and society, so analyzing it from that angle helps one to explore how exactly gender has transformed throughout the ages. 

I would argue that postmodern history is both a “rupture” from previous historiographies and a continuum of historiographical change. In one respect, postmodern history is incredibly different from previous historiographical that we have discussed in class. Postmodernist historians do not always take even the most reliable of sources at face value. That is not to say that historians were not critical of sources and methods prior to the late twentieth century, Leopold Ranke initiated that the century before. Where postmodern history differs is that its methods lead to a great variety of interpretations and conclusions, depending on who wrote it.

In another respect, postmodern history is another stage of historiographical change. Much of what we have discussed in class has been how historiography and historiographical methods have evolved in the two millennia since Herodotus. In other words, historiography is not static, nor does it exist in a vacuum. When a society and culture shifts so do the historical methods. For example, when Christianity became more mainstream in Medieval Europe, the historical writings of the time reflected the attitudes and values of Christianity. In the late twentieth century, when society and culture became more aware and considerate of previously ignored groups of people, historical scholars wrote more accounts and analyses of their histories. Historiography is always changing and postmodernism is no exception. 

