## The Challenges of Postmodernism: Recognition in a Nihilistic World
### Or the one where I make some bad analogies and hope they will somehow make sense in the end
Postmodern history is incredibly interesting and multifaceted. While outwardly, it looks like a complete break from the traditional trends in historiography, it is really not that enormous of a change. Time continues to march on, and so does historiography. As society changes and grows, morphing to fit people outside of the traditionally dominant group (white men, what a *shock*!), so does historiography. Postmodernism means many different things within the world of historiography, but most importantly it gave historically oppressed peoples a voice, and tried to create a language that could more appropriately voice their histories. `this is a very vague paragraph!`

History is the trunk of a tree, and each time a new method of studying history was developed, a new branch would grow out of the trunk. The difference, however, with postmodern history, is that instead of growing a new branch, the tree grew stronger roots. `i'm enjoying the deep irony of using a such a strong metaphor to explain postmodernism, which cautions us against the immense power and danger of metaphors` What I mean by roots, as I recognize that my analogy is slowly devolving, is that postmodern history finally recognized all of the **multitudes** of other players who contributed to the furthering of history. A world full of rich, powerful, men, would’ve failed a long time ago. A world without women, people of different colors and ethnicities, impoverished communities, or any other of the throngs of people that have been forgotten about, could not exist. Post modernity, *even* with its nihilistic tendencies, recognized this flaw, and sought to do something about it. Without a history of their own, many of these marginalized groups can “be trapped in a present where oppressive social relations appear natural and inevitable. Knowledge of history is knowledge that things have changed and do change” (Green and Troup, pg. 253). While incredibly radical, this is not a paradigm shift. This is a continuation of historiography. As time moves on, so does historiography. `can you think of comparable shifts previously? that would help your argument`

One of the inherent problems that postmodernism recognized was that of language and discourse. If the language we use in inherently flawed, then *how* can we possibly effectively communicate a complex historical dialogue? `more accurately: how much can it represent the past?` Looking at postcolonial history, even the word postcolonial itself is incredibly imperfect. Nile states that colonization still continues to this day, with “the descendants of the original colonists remain[ing] dominant over the colonized indigenous peoples” (Green and Troup, pg. 278). Foucault states that these “facts of discourses” are not “universally recognized characteristics” (Discourse, pg. 22). While the nitpickiness of postmodernists with language can sometimes be **incredibly** confusing and tedious, they do make an important point. Language, a tool that differs across different societies, can also be used to reinforce traditional power dynamics. Marginalized people only have the discourse of their *oppressor* to communicate the aggressions committed against them. This can create an inherently flawed discourse that does not truly communicate a “true history”. `doesn't this nice paragraph kind of argue against your original claim that PM wasn't a fundamental change?`

8
