### Emily Delcoure
# The Losses of Postmodernism

The only shift that occurred in the Postmodernist Era is from clear cut, factual evidence in words that are said explicitly, to a "make-your-own definition" buffet of common words and analysis that may or may not be included in your final work. Foucault is a prime example of the latter: a work devoid of the true intent of your research, or analysis created from the unspoken words of a researched text. While Joan Scott's work shows the ability to redefine words based on whim and individual context.

Many scholars have taken to postmodernist theory in terms of writing and researching history, it has been able to provide a voice for a myriad of disenfranchised groups. But at what cost to intellectual intergrity? Foucault's biggest claim to fame is that his works cannot be put into a box, or discipline as might call it, and he has furthered that thinking time and time again: no discipline is the best way to write intellectually. WHich might be true for Foucault, it might even be true for other historians, sociologists, or even journalists. Where this concept falls short is on the outskirts of popular history where the racists, sexists, and *Holocaust deniers* lie. Is it as whimiscal for them to interpret data and other information by what **isn't said**? Foucault has respect for minorities and at least a single ethical bone in his body--the same cannot be said for those that wish to use postmoderism to undermine the experiences of these newly-voiced disenfranchised groups.

Catherine Hall had many great things to say about the creation of gender roles in Victorian England, and it was honestly an enlightening read. But if every person has their own definition of "gender," as Joan Scott would willingly allow, and an analysis of history that can back up their usage and definition, then what's the point of having dictionaries--or even intellectual institutions that use defined words. Now, even I'll admit that the idea of having no institutuions of language would be far-fetched to say the least. There are downsides and consequences to creating new definitions for known words. A more contemporary example of this is the word "liberal" which to many is a degrading slur, and others a badge of honor; when in reality the word simply means to give or do something generously. There are many out there that would take advantage of defining words by their own personal experience, and those people need to be checked by an institution that requires certain intellectual criteria to accept its usage within a published work--bare minimum.

In short, postmodernism has created a hippie-dippie world where any word could mean anything to any given person, or the meaning could be completely disregarded in the name of Foucault-styled analysis. Also, as devil's advocate, postmodernism is wrong and should never have existed--it evolved from nothing and will be replaced with whatever came before it.