  Postmodernism to me falls more in line with my argument on Marxism, an evolutionary conception rather than revolutionary. As many new schools of thoughts and theoretical models before it, it is effective at identifying flaws and listing critiques while only offering vague guidance towards solutions (if any). Some of the more nhillistic overtones and extreme skepticism from the postmodernistic approach also ,to me, teeter on the level where they devalue their own utulity. That being said, postmodern ideas and concepts are not without merit or value.
  
  The agreeable tenants on which postmodernism is based, such as emphasizing research of historically marginalized groups or perspectives, are valid and valuable to the field. I do believe that this will enrich the field and open doors to new and valuable research. I also believe that this broader scope of focus will bring renewed interest to the field from those who are interested in uncovering these histories that have been long overdue. Although repeated from previously seen models `give examples!`, the reinforcement of contextual awareness and transparent biases are important lessons to be taken from postmodernism.
 
 As with many of the concepts and models discussed thus far in this class I am still not ready to endorse postmodernism as the final solution to the historiographical problem. `exactly what is this problem?` Rather, I believe it fills another important void `what was the void it filled?` that will bring about innovative research and discovery to an ever evolving field. 

6: too short and lacking any sufficient detail from ways previous readings have discussed postmodernism
