## A Look at Postmodern Historiography

Postmodern historiography is a continuation of historiographical change overtime. The reason for this is that as historians and society change and it makes sense that the way people write history will change as well. `is postmodernism the same KIND of change as everything we've seen before?` As more people from different backgrounds and regions contribute to the study of history and as society becomes more inclusive. It is simply a new development in the continuum of historiographical change and as a result made it posssible for subaltern studies and history that focuses on topics that were previously ignored.

I don't believe that my view of history or historiography has change very much as a result of the readings for this class. To me it has always seems obvious that the person writing history, will bring their own views and biases into their work no matter how hard they try to be objective. `true, but postmodernism as applied to history is going far beyond that debate that characterizes modern (not postmodern) history` Personally, I love studying history because, I enjoy understanding and knowing about what has occurred in the past `and of course the point of postmodernism is to make us question the extent we can even know what occured` and how it has or is affecting currents events. While most of our readings `recently or for the whole class?` have argued that we cannot every really know what happened in the past. I disagree, however, it is important that historiography continues to ask how we can study the past in new ways and apply different processes.

Having said that, without the development of postmodernism, sualtern studies, Marxist history, the Annales School and Ranke, my views of history would be very different without them.

6: other than mentioning "sualtern" studies, you don't really engage with anything from the last 2 weeks.
