The Postmodern style that has invaded historiography is abstract and philosophical in a way that history has never been intended before. In a world attempting to legitimize the historical profession the rise of scientific and total histories led historians to believe in the fundamental totality of history. My own personal views of history have managed to subconsciously reflect an off postmodern approach. I’ve found it a bit liberating to discuss postmodernism as it allows an all-encompassing intellectual approach to historiography. Because, we’ve spent so long defining history into contained categories of study that historically did not allow for such plasticity outside their confines. If the premier goal of postmodernism is give historians a wakeup call to be conscious observer of history and its functions then it’s succeeding well. 

What makes the abstract approach to history special is the idea that history can operate with a compilation of various humanities’ and social sciences’ theories. With a post-modernist theory  `such as?` in mind a historian can approach their question by including various ideas and explanations that can compile to make a holistic view of such your study. In this method there is no need to explain why this explanation necessarily matters other than your outright attempt to give a non-concrete answer to complicated topic. It’s unreasonable to believe that humans can ever come up with a perfect answer to what happened and leaving room to for historians to improve your ideas. History as such should be treated with respect that it is a complicated study deserving more than a handful of scholars dictating a simplistic idea of random events causing the next is flawed. We should understand all elements of a society as it evolves and makes decisions, asking important questions along the way. We should be aware of the isolated events and individual actors that can make massive waves of change in a culture and we should be aware the whole time about the specific context that each society lives within.    Without good post-modernist approaches we are unable to blend together increasingly prominent schools of theory, schools like feminist historical work should be able to blend in Marxist ideals, and other cultural examinations in order to deliver conclusions on the past that are not rigid factoids alone. 

The danger of removing the free thinking approach to history lies in the regression of a field that needs to adapt more than ever. History is rooted in power and when we give power to the beliefs of nuanced writing that systematically involves multiple categories we reward intelligent, questioning thinking that drives discovery. Histories should be fascinating and fun full of wondrous ideas, the past should give inspiration and understanding about ourselves.  Our own connections to past can sometimes be found in the most unlikely of places. Our advancing learning of the past should always to attempt to gain understanding of both context and culture of a society in a way that identifies the reasons that make history so fantastic to all.  Attempting to force all past cultures into one mold is like trying to shove a round block into a square hole. 

7: this is all very well said, but i'm still having trouble connecting it to our readings and understanding how it concretely relates to how we've discussed postmodernism thus far.
