# The Historical World that Postmodernism Created: Factionalism and Diversity
	
**Late 20th century postmodernism has not only reshaped my view of the study of history but it has also provided a framework for how future historians should examine various fields of history.** Foucault challenged the historical field to contextualize each piece of historical studies instead of instantly accepting or rejecting it based on its perceived merits (Archelogy of Knowledge, p. 21). After analyzing Foucault's works, I beleive that historians should not waste time debating which historical field is better whether it is microhistory, macrohistory, Marxist history, political history, Annales School, quantitative history or other historical fields of study. Instead, **historians should accept each historical work as a snapshot of a larger picture.** The Annales School primarily focuses on the social and economic aspects of history which leaves a missing piece of the historical picture that political history must incorporate (Popkin, p. 110). Quantitative history can provide exceptional data that explains larger trends across social movements but it can often fail to give history a human face (Houses, p. 165). Microhistory fills that gap by using the stories of individuals and small groups to explain the historian’s narrative. Postmodernism taught me to understand that one historical field cannot excel without another. **In order for us to truly understand the complexities of the past, we must accept an approach of plurality by respecting and understanding the purpose of each historical method.** `historical method? unclear what field refers to here`
	
**Postmodernism is a paradigm shift from previous approaches to history**. The rise of feminist history and postcolonial history gave new voices to social groups that the study of history had previously left in the shadows. Instead of viewing history through the standard “Eurocentric” white male approach, the study history was now forced to redesign itself to incorporate other points of views (Houses, p. 262 & 321). For example, the western male historical approach saw the Renaissance as a crucial time period of change and development. However, feminist historian Joan Kelly challenged that historical narrative by writing that “there was no renaissance for woman for women- at least, not during the Renaissance,” (Houses, p. 263). Kelly argued that while men experienced improvement in their lives during the Renaissance period, women did not reap any benefits. While previous historical fields of study like Marxist history attempted to give overlooked social groups a voice in history, there was a preconceived economic lens to his examination of women’s history (Scott, p. 1061). **Feminist history allowed for women’s history to stand on its own** and not be restricted by other historical fields. `don't forget gender as analytical category`
	
The rise of post-colonial history finally gave indigenous individuals, and societies a voice in the historical field. The post-colonial historian Franz Fanon “confronted both European racism and its corrosive effects upon the colonized people” in his book *Black Skin, White Masks* (Houses, p. 322). Stories like *White Buffalo Women* articulated an indigenous cultural identity for the Cheyenne Indians and attacked American history for not adequately incorporating indigenous people in American history (Houses, p. 335). **The development of these two new historical fields altered the trajectory of history by providing a more complete picture of our past**. In order to produce a more holistic historical perspective, we must accept feminist history, post-colonial history, microhistory, macrohistory, Marxist history, political history, Annales School, Quantitative history and other historical fields as **meaningful examinations of the past.** `so is the main contribution of postmodernism the idea that we simply have to include more voices to get a complete history? or does it go beyond that?`

9
