## Postmodernism as a Paradigm Shift

I think that **postmodernist history** (and **gender history** in particular) **is a paradigm shift**, but that doesn’t necessarily mean that it isn’t **also a continuation of historiographical change** as well. I don't really agree that postmodernism has to exist as one without being the other as well. Aren't all the paradigm shifts _part_ of the continuation of historiographical change?

The **_cynicism_** common in the different types of postmodernist historiography differs from the types of historiography we studied befor spring break significantly enough that I think we can call this a “postmodernist paradigm.” Enlightenment Historiography, for example, is comparitively optimistic with its values of human rights and that society does not need to be defined be rigid structures. The sections on the Annales School and Professionalization give encouragement through the introduction of brand new scientific methods of study, which brought us closer to the goal of "seeking out the Truth." Sociology brings science into research even more, and Marxism helps connect these trusted scientific research methods back with society and humanity. Postmodernism, however, is considerably more neghative. With previous paradigms, **we acknowledged before that bias is ever-present, but postmodernism really hammers home that it is impossible to write an unbiased history**. This observation is presented in sort of a soul-crushing manner too. There's no way to write a non-biased history, which is what we should be striving for. However, if we can't do it, what is the point of even trying?

There’s a bit of **_depressed optimism_** to it as well now, however: **postmodernism acknowledges the impossibility of avoiding bias, but still strives to make histories as minimally biased as possible**. With postmodernism, we can address issues like we did _in class on Monday_, when we **discussed Postcolonialism**, and **whether or not European historians can present histories of colonized places because of their lenses of influence**, and **whether it’s possible to remove colonial bias in “postcolonial” history**. 

I focus mostly on bias here, both because I think it's the most impactful contribution and for the sake of space, but we also get **new**(**er**) things in postmodernist history, like the **_outright_ acknowledgement that history is a tool of power in oppression**. The same way **colonialism has erased much of the history of colonized peoples** and **shifted it towards a more Euro-centric focus**, **women have been erased from history makes it appear like it’s “natural and inevitable” for them to be oppressed** _(p. 253)_. Before, we see that history is a tool of power, but we don’t always see it being utilized. _In the shift to micro-history, we see a demand for more relevant histories geared towards groups_ (as well as the ability to focus more directly on individuals and small historical groups or eras), we get a little of this, but **with postmodernism, it’s more obviously geared towards encouraging social change**— like the attempt to reeducate people about **pre-colonization history**, and the **real past roles of women** in life and society. 

7: a good start, but still too vague in terms of addressing the topics over the last 2 weeks.
