## Postmodern Comment

Jerome T. Mondragon

Postmodern history does constitute a significant paradign shift during the late 20th Century. The reason for its divergance is its emphasis on the __deconstruction__ of traditional history. Whether it be Postmodernism, Postcolonialism, or Gender histories; they all share the common theme for the deconstruction and the reinterpret of history. 

One of the most vocal critic of modern history was of course, Michel Foucault. He is no doubt a spokesperson for the Postmodern movement because he strongly emhasized the dissection of history. In the _Archeology of Knowlegde_, Foucault points out the flaws of written traditional history. Whereas traditional history strictly adheres to the rules in order to create a viable and credible work, Foucault argues that it's these rules that hinder history (Foucault 21-22). Notions such as language, spirit, influence, and even the historians themselves are heavily scrutinized. How can history be truly expressed if we're all bound by the constraints of traditional history? Thus, Foucault convinces us that there is more to history than mere rules and ritual.  `well said!`

Postcolonialism is another modern genre which reeavaluates and reinteprets history. Since stories regarding indeginous groups were traditionally written from a Western or European perspective, the purpose of postcolonialism history was "reconstruct the appalling scale of loss experienced by colonized and indigenous peoples." (Green and Troupe 281) The _White Buffalo Woman_ by Henrietta Whiteman is a perfect example of Postmodernism's revolutionaly concepts because the tale reconstructs the history of the Cheyennes tribe. The story follows the personal experiences of White Buffalo Woman from the 19th and 20th Century. It strictly focuses on her own experiences also encorporating the tribe's origin story and other important values. Her story was ultimately passed along to her great grandchild, the author of the work. (Whiteman 295) At the same time, the story specifically excludes "white" people and only referring them as the "confined" people. (Whiteman 290) This story is only priveleged to members of the tribe, which is why it was passed along orally. Therefore, postcolonial demonstrates how the Cheyenne's lost history is reconstructed without the inclusion of outsider influences. `but then again even for us to talk about it necessarily puts it against the backdrop of 'conventional' history.`

Lastly, Gender History deconstructs history by challenging the narrative written from a male and masculine perspective. Gender is refered as the "cultural definitions of behavior" and the "social relationships based on percieved differences between the sexes." (Green and Troupe 253 ) In the _Science and the Seance_, Georgina Weldon was defiant against gender roles during 19th Century England. The female subordinate gender was expected to conform and submit to dominate male society. She openly flaunted female and gender superiority over men by performing siances, questioning marriage roles, promoted different child rearing, encouraged vegetarianism. These were revolutionary ideas for her time. By defeating her husband at trial, she ultimately defeated male society. (Walkowitz 308-325) This work by Walkowitz is a perfect example of postmodern history because of its captivating subject material, but also because the time it was created. This subject couldn't be written any time before! It's a direct dissassembly and reassembly of history written in a masculine and traditional manner.    

Traditional history up until the 20th Century has led the groundwork of credible history with its numerous rules. It's these rules that make history credible and reliable. However, we must know the rules in order to break them! As these Postmodern history works demonstrate, its deconstruction of the stories that create an new and aspiring genre. `i wouldn't say genre as much as intellectual approach generally--as postmodernism permeates many genres (and disciplines) As Foucault points out, if we depart from these rules, historians and the genre can be set free! (Foucault 27)

10: one of your best posts!
