### Post Modern History: Both Useful and Destructive

My opinions of history have absolutely been affected by the historical writings within the postmodern paradigm. **The questioning of Eurocentric structures and grand narratives is essential to discovering a more complex and diverse view of history and the cultures within it**. I do not see this as new or revolutionary however. It was inevitable for us to question our past assumptions about history, to question why non-Western cultures have been left out or mostly ignored as the world became more connected and gained greater access to alternative archives of knowledge. I would wager people have questioned general histories well before postmodernism and poststructuralism became prevalent and these models of history simply allowed for a greater, more diverse voice to come forth. I would also argue that postmodernism, despite its benefits for historical thought, has also been potentially destructive for the field of history. When the questioning of "historical truth" leads to denials of historical facts, postmodernism can take its pompous theoretical dribble and throw it out the window.

Post-modernism has been useful for history regarding cultural shifts, including perspectives which better involve gender and race, developing histories of post-colonialism, and the questioning previous and current Eurocentric historical writings. It offered an opportunity for new perspectives and re-evaluations of past events which were previously viewed through a white male lens. Interdisciplinary approaches were incorporated into the field of history and a **rejection toward the meta-narratives** (grand narratives) gave way to smaller, localized narratives. Historian Joan W. Scott discussed how previous notions of historical/philosophical concepts can be lacking and unrepresentative of different groups in society.

  > "Still, when we invoke class, we are working with or against a set of definitions that, in the case of Marxism, involve an idea of economic causality and a vision of the path along which history has moved dialectically. There is no such clarity or coherence for either race or gender. In the case of gender, the usage has involved a range of theoretical positions as well as simple descriptive references to the relationships between the sexes" (Scott, Gender, pp. 1055).
  
  It's all well and good to discuss class and the inequalities between the poor and the rich, but if we fail to also consider race and gender within that discussion we are potentially missing out on key elements of the topic and losing the stories of the people directly involved.

**Postmodernism can be potentially destructive for the same questioning of history that allowed for diversity in the field.** Subjectivity, the questioning of "truth" within history, and the notion that "truth" does not exist all have the potential to be taken to the extreme. There is a slippery slope which can lead to the questioning of whether the study of history has any real value or even more destructive,** a denial of historical events such as the Holocaust**. Hayden White, Foucault, Lyotard all questioned historians' ability to provide accuracy and reality within historical writings and argued that historians were either struggling for power rather than knowledge, telling stories rather than facts, or focusing too heavily on "grand narratives" rather than localized narratives (Houses, pp. 302-303). All of these arguments have validity, but when taken to the extreme “may be construed to be the most damaging undertaking ever performed by a historian" (FHTH, pp. 136-139). We must not deny our past.

I dislike the idea that objective truth is undefinable. I think past historical writings should be questioned and re-examined to allow for alternative histories and more diverse perspectives. That being said, we as readers and historical scholars still need to actively pursue facts and be objective as well as it can be done and not take theoretical subjectivity too far. 
