The postmodern approach towards history did have some impact on how I thought about history, but I feel that it is the postmodern approach that I think of history as being. *Except for Foucault, that was a more confusing time!* **It seems that postmodern historical approaches begun to make new strides in incorporating new groups of people and their histories, along with new analytical lens, into history.**

	Postmodern historical approaches can be considered a paradigm shift, or a 'rupture', because they did break away from past historiographical approaches. It shifted away from writing under models. Although, not all models were completely abandoned, as some English writers continued to utilize Marx's model in their writing. It also incorporated psychoanalysis as a viewpoint into history, as shown by Catherine Hall in her excerpt in Houses. New fields, such as Women's history, were given a voice and allowed new works to be completed in the study of women in the past. Other minorities, like Indigenous cultures, such as the *White Buffalo Woman* by Henrietta Whiteman, were given the opportunity to voice their history as well. While there was still the obstacle of missing or lack of texts on subjects, such as Women's history, new works were being produced and new history being discovered. **Not only had postmodernism incorporated new means of analysis into the field, but it had also created a new sense of attention to the unvoiced people in the past.** 
  
	Although, it could be argued that the postmodern approaches were not a paradigm shift, or a 'rupture', because as stated in the previous paragraph, certain models were still being used in different areas of the world. The new approaches were still, in a way, being incorporated into the grand narrative, whether that was the intent or not. **There was still an emphasis on understanding the minorities/groups in of themselves, but also in their relation and interactions with the surrounding world.** There were historians that still wanted to know how the history of these minorities/marginal groups played into the bigger historical understanding of history. 
  
	I found it hard to take a single side when answering the last question(s). I find that both sides have strong arguments behind them. While it could be a 'rupture' for various reasons; it could not be a 'rupture' for various other reasons. It will be interesting to hear others answers in discussion and maybe then, I will feel more confident in picking a side. **Postmodern approaches have changed the field of historiography whether acknowledged as a 'rupture' or not!** *It incorporated new histories into the world, it included psychoanalysis as a new lens into the past, and even influenced my idea of what history is and what it constitutes.* 
