### A Look at Postmodern Paradigm Shifts

**Postmodern historiography represents a new development in the continuum of historiographic progression and changes, rather than a radical or unprovoked paradigm shift.** Just as Marx ‘_(r)evolutionized_’ history from a perspective of social class, postmodern historians try to take the central (most commonly, the Eurocentric) point of view, and broaden the scope, in order to amplify the non-centralized (non-western), native voices. Within postmodern history, there is a range of opinions regarding western historiography in relation to the peoples of the globe. Some of the originals in postmodern history are also often seen as the radicals.

Historian Edward Said and linguist Noam Chomsky represent some of academia’s strongest push-back against the legacy of colonialism. They advocate for “orientalist” histories, which seek to give non-western historiography a platform. While their efforts are not without merit, their approaches to change the nature of ‘traditional’ historiography is not without its criticisms. _With a touch of irony, much in the way Eurocentric histories often paint “others” with a broad brush, so too does Said and scholars like him – classifying all non-western peoples as “Oriental”, leaving the same people devoid of agency or individuality._

_More moderate historians emerged within the postmodern the community, known as subaltern historians._ Those like Depesh Chakrabarty, **recognized the problems inherent in Eurocentric histories – those centralized on the western narrative – but, rather than discredit their influence completely, subalterns advocated for the simple recognition of impressions made on contemporary historiography. To this community of academics, recognizing the presence of the problem was necessary to writing better history. **While this observation can be useful, it can also be frustrating. As with many other postmodernists, critique is rife, while proposed solutions are few and far between. Typical of many philosophers, Michel Foucault suffered from the same habit of plentiful analysis with little presence of resolution. **Critique without solution is not only frustrating, but also potentially delegitimizing for postmodern scholarship.**

Though many problems are recognized without providing viable plans to rectify, _one cannot begin to address a problem if they are not first brought to light_. In this way, postmodern historiography is most useful and necessary. Even still, the lens in which we view history is constantly evolving. **The study of gender and sex is a perfect example of how quickly enlightenment thought can expand**. In 1986, when Joan W. Scott wrote about gender as a useful tool for historical categorization, she touched on a variety of issues. She explored traditional historians’ work such as Marx and Foucault in order to demonstrate the importance of gender in a historiographical context. _To the 21st-century historian however, one cannot read Scott’s work without noticing how clearly dated her perceptions of gender are, namely, the binary nature of her work._ If nothing else, reading Scott’s useful analysis of gender in postmodern history is a hopeful reminder that, if in merely thirty years, perceptions on something as complex and crucial as gender could develop so drastically, then why not perspectives on topics such as race, ethnicity, or citizenship – just to name a few. Ultimately, **postmodernism represents a much needed step toward enlightenment in historiography. The manner in which it bloomed is an understandable reaction to the crumbling of a colonial system that had existed for centuries, if not millennia.** _Reactionary academia is often extreme, but usually provides the necessary leap from which more moderate thought can grow._
