### Postmodernity
**Postmodernity is used to define a period in time when cultural history expands.** Historically, this era allows for 'history from below' to be told; that is, the **typical large narratives of history are pushed aside**, and histories about everyday people becomes more popular and widely accepted. The expansion of cultural history also allows for more topics to be brought into historical narratives. **Medical, postcolonial, and gender histories** are the few examples we have encountered so far. We began with Michel Foucault and his *Archeology of Knowledge*. Here, Foucault discusses how ideas (knowledge) are brought to life through discourse among intellectuals (Foucault, p.25). He also encourages us to question certain groupings that we are familiar with as well as the authors intentions. This leads us into what Foucault calls the 'linguistic turn'. Postmodern historical narratives are very much focused on rhetoric and linguistics. We then move to medicine, where we are able to see how disease is spatialized.

Foucault, though not a historian, helps us understand that the history of medicine is postmodern because it is a peculiar topic to be discussed by historians. **Medical history is a study of classification systems as well as spaces.** Although medical history is somewhat interesting to me, postcolonial histories resonate most with me because they are clearly not grand narratives. Postcolonial histories are focused on telling a story about how colonialism has effected non-western parts of the world.

Lastly, **gender as a form of analytical tool can be very useful to postmodern historians.** The fact that history is being viewed through a feminine lens makes this topic postmodern. Joan Scott makes the argument that politics influence the relationship between genders. I found her Marxist dissection of gender to be both useful and interesting. Capitalism creates relationships of power between males and females (Scott, p.1067). Again we return to language as Scott states that **through language, gender identity is constructed (p.103).** **Derrida** is mentioned by Scott as well as by Foucault in relation to deconstruction. By deconstructing language, we are able to read against the grain of a text and ask ourselves new and important questions(1065), which Foucault claims leads to the construction of knowledge.

In closing, I believe that postmodern history constitutes a historical paradigm shift as it allows for new subject matter to be observed. Gender, sexuality, medicine and many more topics are now able to be studied historically as they never were before. The 'linguistic turn' allows for a careful analysis of writing and categorizing which is important to the overall historical processs.
