##Postmodernism So Far

While discussing if postmodern history constitutes a paradigm shift, it’s important to note that these past two weeks have been a paradigm shift for me in this class. While we all had complaints about Foucault, even the gender and postcolonial readings made me stop and read slower, and I have found myself going through these past few readings two, even three times over. 

One constant of history I used to hold dear is that the historian’s job is to seek the truth of the past. As we journey through this course, each reading, every discussion has chipped away at this belief for me. By the time we arrived at Foucault and other postmodernists, I have run out of faith in the concept. The concept that finally broke me was the house explanation. Every individual has a different perspective on a home, and it will look different to each person, and **will provide no closure or grand explanation** as commonly utilized in past historiographical methods (*Houses*, p. 298). 

Postmodernism, in its own definition, is a paradigm shift from conventional “western” historiography methods. **Every topic we covered right up to this unit was constructed from a Eurocentric perspective**. Postmodernism aims to recognize the history of those who were previously grossly underrepresented. Postmodernists utilizes these principles to give histories to marginalized populations, specifically women and indigenous people. Even just looking at the dichotomy of what is traditionally masculine or feminine is a fracture from traditional history, it was not properly represented previously (Houses p. 267). **This garners credit to the postmodern ideal that pure truth is impossible**. Because histories were written since Greek times that did not consider both women and indigenous populations (which is obvious when looking back on Roman texts, by calling the “other” barbarians, they couldn’t make this distinction any easier), then **everything written has more to offer*. 

Finding significance in what is exempt from a text was a radical shift in the methodology of the period. While historians like Ranke or Annales writers adhered to criteria and sought truth from their procedures, postmodernism is a complete break from that. **Being not just attentive to the legitimacy of your source, but to actively criticize it and make a full attempt to understand the context it was in and what can be gained from any excluded data** is a new idea in history. In terms of historiography, postmodernism is a rupture of the (admittedly volatile) status quo. 
