## **Karl Marx and his role in the **_Evolution_** within History and Historiographical practices**

Marxist thoughts and foundations regarding society and human history, although greatly influential and resilient, much like revolutionary thought, was not **_revolutionary_**, but was **_evolutionary_**; resulting from the reactionary processes of political, economical, and societal changes. Marxism has created a large body of historical writing around the globe, incorporating a wide range of subjects and constructed the **Materialist conception of history.** Marxist theory created by **_Friedrich Engels_** and **_Karl Marx_** focuses on *class consciousness* and *evolved* from the political interventions arising out of the working class and revolutionary democratic movements.(Houses, p.33) Much like notions during the **_Age of Enlightenment,_** Marxist theory evoked more insight into social history, rather than strictly history of the elite, such as royalty, military leaders, or the clergy. For example, French *philosophe* **_Voltaire_** broke from tradition of narrating diplomatic and military events, and emphasized customs, social history, and achievements in the arts and sciences. According to Marxists, the theory of history was not written down in one place or through a series of texts and the central dynamic of human history lies in the struggle to provide for physiological and material needs: eating, drinking, a habitation, clothing, and other things.(Houses, p.34) The solution to the struggle was the production of means, which was necessary to satisfy these needs. Although, fulfillment of these needs is never completed, for the satisfaction of the first need, leads to new needs. In this framework, the ways in which material needs are met are the most important influence in human history. The economic structure of society forms the base of all other aspects. 

The *dialectic* process of materialism is filled with contradictions, which would create conflict between social classes and eventually causes it downfall. This is an evolutionary theory stemming from both *Ancient* and *Medieval* historical approach, which saw all of society as factors in a cyclical process that is doomed to fail. Each stage within Marxist framework produces and dominant class and one that would eventually overthrow it. *Renaissance* thinker **_Machiavelli_** used this notion as a justification for militaristic control and imperialism. *Socialism,* or the grand overarching evolutionary theory of human history, rests upon dialectic of economic relationships. This places economic relationships at the core of philosophy, which differentiates from the  thoughts and notions proposed by Leopold von Ranke, who placed an emphasis on narrative history and especially international politics. A major factor in Marxists theory and history places an emphasis on the economic subjugation or suppressed of certain people, namely the *proletariat,* and that the people must be aware of their oppression and be active in altering it. This concept had evolved from Enlightened concepts of reason, the importance of human agency, progress, tolerance, constitutional government, and the separation of church and state.(Houses, p.36) Another evolutionary trait in Marxist history is the *telelogical construction of a linear narrative about the past, leading up to a pre-defined end point or goal.(Houses, p.36) 

Like Marxist theory and it's emphasis on economic relationships, the **_Annales School_** sought to seek a **_histoire totale_** and incorporated other factors of history into narratives, rather than strictly political. Marxist historiography was chronologically preceded by, and has always had to co-exist with, a more broadly based and less theoretically demanding "people's history", or a 'history from below.'(Houses, p.43) Marx's position encompasses philosophy, political economy. as well as such allied disciplines as history and political science, his overall position is based on his theory of finite human beings.(Rockmore, p. 45) Another evolutionary connection to the *Annales School* of thought, in the fact that the 17th century saw unprecedented levels of famine and human mortality, such as war, rebellions, and popular revolts occurring all over the world. This caused an emphasis on social, cultural, and economic history and ensured historians could take away knowledge from multiple sources and aspects of human existence and avoid rigid ideologies. In conclusion, Marxism played a huge role and participated in the *evolutionary* function of history. His thoughts and historical approaches were not revolutionary, because they were borrowed and extended from historians from the past, as well as, the reactions of political, economic, and societal changes that have occurred. History has shifted evolved from narrowed topics and from the perspectives of elite people, to a broader history of the people. 
