## #2 (Revolutionary)  MARX AND HISTORY
Desiree' Martinez
##### Tom Rockmore, “Marx”, 488-96
##### Houses, “Marxist Historians”, 33-58


Marxist History is revolutionary history because it advocates social reform with the understanding that, "class struggle has been central to the historical process." (Houses p.34) This is in contrast to previous histories which boastfully **linked** histories (correctly or haphazardly) to legitamize reasons for actions. Antiquarian history did it to _establish_ regions of power thru such things like geneology, Medevial history _secured_ power over domains thru moral and judgement, and Elightenment theories questioned power but nonetheless, established national ideas. Thus, Marxist history is revolutionary that it understands the driving forces of human agnecy but upon analysis fails at seperating this fact from its theory. As Green and Troup state, the paradox, "its dependent upon the consciousness and actions of men and women." (Houses p.36)

Marx's theory is based on "**materialism**," that humans have a _need_ to fulfill basic self sustaining means but once those means have been met the _desire_ for **more** will arise thus, igniting economic and social change, the rise of Capitalism. As Green and Troup state, "Marx identifies the way in which human material needs are met as the most important influence in human history." (Houses p. 35) And it can be agreed that disparities drive change, changes drives advancement which inspires technologies and thus bringing about society and societies interaction with these technologies form culture.  However, the one thing that all histories have struggled with is **human agency** and its inevitable led to _hubris_. 

It could be said that this very concept led to the downfall of the Greeks and Romans, the rise and fall of the Church, Evolutionist theories, and Imperialsm. This concept of _hubris_ is alive and well. And yes Marxism lays out revolutionary yet realistc observations about mercantilism and possible futures of Capitalism but underestimates this agency of **humanism**. My father once told me, "We have bastardized Marxism.The concept will never work. We are selfish." This selfishness is noted in Rockmore's _Marx_ paper, there is a "belief that real human freedom depends on econimic factors" (Marx p.491) and maybe that is why such revolutionary ideas are most accepted after extreme stresses of economical factors like war. Thus, it can be conclued that Marxist history is revolutionary for its concept and driving power to understand society and how it has advanced through history but I have concluded that Marx history has been layered and developed over past concepts of empiricism as E.P. Thompson has reflected. 

7: very interesting and original (love the hubris / humanism angle), but you veered a bit too far off the rails in _evaluating_ marxism toward the end (which would be fine if you had a lot more space--although i do totally agree with you). what i really wanted was for you to expand your first paragraph into the whole comment in order to show in some detail how previous histories and historiographies might have had similar goals but went about it in a totally different way.
