### Marxism
#### Group 2: Revolutionary 
The Marxist view of historiography was a revolutionary way of looking at history, using a completely new and different lens. Never before had historians used social class distinctions as a methodology of studying history, differentiating Marx from Ranke (Green and Troup, pg. 36) Instead of seeing history as a continuation of the four great empires that would come to pass before the second coming of Christ, Marxist historians see society as three distinct economic systems. Ancient society, feudalism, and capitalism, are the three distinct periods throughout history, each being used as a change agent to continue pushing history forward (pg. 35). This was a *revolutionary* idea because it no longer revolved around the Christian centric view history, and studied the underlying economic systems throughout history, instead of the different religions, rulers, or borders. 

The divide between religion and history had been a reoccurring effect of the Enlightenment, but Marx was one of the first historians to reformat his view of history so completely. Marx did not see that all of society up until that day had been a continuation of the forth great empire, Rome. Instead, Marx saw the differing economic bases that each society rested upon. Because of this, Marx also saw man as making his own history, guided by the underlying bases (Rockmore, pg. 495). The interactions between humans and the world around them is what creates history, it is not a predestination fashioned by a divine being. This was a huge break from the historiography of the past few hundred years, and a revolutionary change that would impact the future of historiography.

Finally, Marx *revolutionized* historiography in the way that he looked at change agents throughout history. Almost contradicting himself, Marx stated that only through the development of a class consciousness would anything change, which would create history (Green and Troup, pg. 36). This puts a microscope on the individual. Marx also believed that the “base” economic system was what drove history. By looking at both the underlying systems, as well as the individuals that lived in them, Marx did what other historians had not, and paved the way for a new type of historiography. This was a step towards a different view of history, and a different methodology within historiography, simply by recognizing that economic status impacted the everyday man, who would in turn be the one to push history forward. Only once the common man recognized the systems which he lived within would he be able to overthrow them, and essentially become the agent of change. Instead of believing that all history was predestined, or on the converse, believing that only man himself pushed history along, Marx recognized the necessity to look at the world in which the man was living, as well as the systems which restrained him. This revolutionized historiography. 

9: you very clearly emphasize the revolutionary nature of marxist thinking, but it can seem if you're trying to convince the reader by simply repeating that he's being revolutionary. Use that space (every sentence counts) for your argument and more historical examples. you can also be more effective by directly addressing counter-arguments, like how potentially evolutionary aspects were in fact distinct breaks from tradition or were not as important as the innovations.
