  Karl Marx has left a lasting and controversial legacy in the social and historical world. Many of his ideas and concepts have been widely adapted over the course of the 20th and 21st centuries, with equally controversial results. The label Marxism itself has become synonymous with revoultion. However, the basis of Marxism is actually more rooted in an evolutionary process, not revolutionary. The revolutions associated with Marxism are merely a bridge into new historical eras according to Marx's model of history.
    
  For Marx the primary driving force for change comes from his model of dialectics. This theory asserts that within every societal structure there lies a thesis and an antithesis. Both of these elements co-exist in a certain synthesis. The undoing of a social structure is built into it and pre-determined that one day it's antithesis will be it's downfall. Marx's view of history was one of a cyclical and repetitive nature. In essence, this means that Marxism was a natural and necessary evolution that was in direct response to the climate of society which capitalism was creating during Marx's time. 
  
  Marx's evolutionary perspective of historical and societal change was not limited to his view of his current era. He had argued that Capitalism itself was once the antithesis of the dominant system in place, in that case feudalism was the dominant thesis and power. As the industrial revolution changed the power dynamics, capitalist production would be the downfall of the longlasting stranglehold of feudalism. Feudalism too once served in this role according to Marx's narrative of dialectic history, as the aggricultural revolution made land holding the prominent emphasis of power in it's day and shifted societies structure. Following this narrative even a Marxist or socialist society would inherrently produce its own antithesis that would eventually overthrow it and begin the cycle anew. Thus, the main narrative of Marxist history is rooted in an evolution not revolution. Revolution is just a means to the end.
