## Marxism is an Evolution in the Study and Writing of History

The Marxist approach to history is a continuation of changes over the centuries in the ways people study and write history. **It was an evolution in how people looked at the world.** While Marx's views on society were different his way of categorizing history is based off of previous works, such as Polybius's idea of organizational cycles of history. As way as the study of society through differences in class, and studying and writing history about the ordinary people.

Marx viewed human history as separated into three different periods each a result of *advancements in modes of production* **(Green and Troup. 35)**. The periods were broken down as "*ancient society (Greece and Rome), feudal society and capitalist or (modern bourgeois) society"* **(Green and Troup. 35)**. Marx is not the first person to classify history into time periods, with different features such as Polybius's view that history is made of *"repeated cycles in which one dominant state would rise and then decline, to be replaced by another"* **(Popkin. 36)**. While Polybius theory is mainly focusing on states, Marx's time periods are related to the economic societal changes through history. From the Greek and Roman worlds that were focused around the Mediterranean to the medieval world during which the population of Europe increased to the world Marx known. One filled with new ideas and modes of production and opportunity.  

Marx and Marist history focuses mostly on class and how the different classes, particularly the lower or proletariat class lived. While study of the working classes in an evolution in historical writing, it is not a revolutionary change. *It was during the end of the eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries  that the working class formed* **(Green and Troup. 49)** and as a result people like Marx began to study this new group of people. This lead to *"an interest in ordinary people [...] rather than just in their political organizations"* **(Green and Troup. 33)**. This is a evolution from the views of historians in the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries that studied the lower class mainly relating to **how their actions effected political events** **(Popkin. 71)**. It simply makes sense that when society, as a whole modernizes with population growth historians will look for new groups and ideas to write about.

The changes Marx and the historians that followed him made to historiography were an evolution of the previous way people looked at and wrote history. It makes sense that people would began to study the working class because the number of people working increased particularly in cities during Marx's life and there was more information available. Also throughout history there has been a slow but steady trend of historians looking to find events, peoples, and groups that have been overlooked in the past and write those histories.
