Marx is a divisive figure; in every study of humanities his theories cause innumerable debates on the human condition. Marxist history in itself is a treacherous balance between presenting the past and theory building. *The exact methods of Marxist histories were grew from a stricter scholarship of history and became revolutionary in their results.* These histories gave way to an index of past struggles focused on the very development of humanity in the quest of survival.  **By focusing the historical lens on humanities agency in relation to their environment/society, Marxists turned history into a theoretical exploration of human motivation.**

Marxist historians are a strange juxtaposition of a renaissance romanticist and modern political science. Between these two polar opposite mindsets we may find where Marxists attempt to write history. **Marx’s tradition upheld the modern belief in deep source analysis but fell victim to the alluring nature of theory development.** *Part of Marxists revolutionary trends were the increasing fervor to use history as evidence in the development of a class conscious history of humanity.* Thompson’s *exploitation* is a fine example of the Marxist problem as he offers an insightful view of the common industrialists society he strays very far from heavy citation. His writings begin to read more like a sociologist’s description rather than a historical text, he cites data when there is little of it and waxes poetic for pages on end (Houses.48.49). His scholarship flies in the face of Ranke whom had long since established a highly comprehensive peer review and footnote system.  When Marxists wrote they separated themselves from researchers like Ranke who wished to similarly create a science of history. Ranke and his students applied a dispassionate approach to humanity aiming not to see the world as a conflicting account of human behavior but the sum total of actors in the past. *The separation of the two schools is highlighted from past historians as well, separating from a shared cultural celebration of the past lacks a singular political message.* **The lack of a strong nationalist message in Marxist history created a steep divide between historians of past eras.** 

Historians like Thompson read much more like social scientists hoping to diagnose social ills. His history, while ostensibly thorough, harkens back to almost medieval writings focused around a single dogma. **The revolutionary nature of the Marxists is presented with the fervent notion of creating new intelligible laws of social behavior.** The elements of history that Marxists pull for data inevitably lead to what essentially a foundational basis for other fields like political science and sociology. History in this mindset becomes flexible within itself as humans lives are shaped not by the sum total of the past, in their relationship with their needs in society. Marxist perspective occurs not in the great tales of the past but by the conscious behavior of those who’ve lived before.  
