***More of the Same: Marxist History***

The rise of Marxist history in the middle 20th century was a **continuation and a natural progression** in the study of history. Like the 18th century historian Vico, Marxist historians saw the history of the world in stages or time periods (Popkin, p. 60) (Rockmore, p. 492). Instead of seeing history through the ages of gods, heroes and human government, Marx saw history through a pre-capitalist era and a post-capitalist era. Their movement was similar to how Enlightenment and Protestant historians had previously challenged the Catholic Church’s dominion over history because, Marxist historians offered a rebuttal to the political and the national history of the 20th century (Popkin, p. 53). Ranke, Hegel and nationalist historians throughout the 19th and early 20th century closely examined history through a political lens (Popkin, p. 70). Comparable to the emergence of the Annales School in the late 1920s and early 1930s, Marxist historians were focused on providing a social and an economic history (Popkin, p.111). By emphasizing social and economic conditions that besieged social classes in history, Marxist historians **were not recreating the historical “wheel”** but were providing a successive **extension of the study of history.** Marxist historians’ approach of providing a different perspective on historical studies by analyzing social classes was the next linear movement for a profession that had previously mostly studied religious and political issues.
	
Just as nationalist, Roman, and prominent historians had done before, Marxist historians were eager to advocate **their own political agenda** through the study of history. Marx saw the spread of capitalism as an intrusion on the rights of the working class or “proletariat” (Rockmore, p. 488). Marx’s political vision was that there would be a “post-capitalist society” with no “division of labor” with equality and communism for all (Rockmore, p. 492-493). 19th century nationalist historians, such as Hegel, advocated that an individual’s nation state was more important than his individual rights, and other nation-states (Popkin, p. 74). The Roman historian Polybus used his historical works to promote “monarchy, aristocracy and democracy” to strengthen the longevity of the Roman Empire (Popkin, p. 32). The Marxist historian Christopher Hill used class conflict to explain the time period leading up to the Glorious Revolution in England (Green, p. 70). Hill’s emphasis on class struggle is presented to make his readers understand why the proletariat must obtain political power. 

Instead of using the concepts of good and evil to describe countries in a manner used in an American Western Civilization Class in World War I America, Marxist historians portray an abusive “bourgeoisie”, or elite class, that takes advantage of the peasant or the working class (Popkin, p. 105) (Green, p. 48). By explaining history through class conflict, Marxist utopians wrote from a political viewpoint conceived to fulfill Marx’s utopian aspirations. By using history to promote their own political beliefs, Marxist historians were **not presenting a unique or fresh perspective** on the study of history but **continuing the practice of political agenda history that has been showcased for thousands of years.**
