### Marxist History Commentary Might Be the Answer on How to Teach Children History

At its bare bones, Marx’s analysis of human history as **“historical materialism”** makes the best sense of history in general, and is probably a good way to teach history to _children_ **(p. 34)**. The very simplistic breakdown is **easy to understand**, and the concepts are both a **true enough** and a **simple enough** way to explain changing social hierarchy to elementary school children, should we continue to do so in the future.

The core idea that _all of history is unified by the struggle to meet basic needs, like food and shelter_, before anything else will make sense to any child old enough for school, making it an excellent place to start when explaining why history is important **(p. 34)**. Any child will understand that it is better to have food than be hungry, and to be inside when it is cold than it is to be outside. **By telling kids that this is the first thing societies do, it will give them a good place for them to build their knowledge of why historical groups did things, starting with something they can personally relate to**- a starving nation might invade one with food because they were hungry, for example. It’s a simple concept, but still accurate- colonialism, for example, happened because European nations wanted the resources the lands they invaded already had. 

From that point, **teaching history can build in depth and detail as the child grows and understands more**. The concept that the fulfillment of needs is never enough can be paralleled with the child’s own growing world. Marx argues that **the fulfillment of a need leads to new needs** is easy enough to explain: if two children both have food, but one has better food, the other child will want the better food. The basic need for food is met, but that leads to a desire for better food, and a new need is born **(p. 35)**. It’s simple, but still accurate enough that children would not be taught falsehoods about the motivations of historical action. 

Marxist history wouldn’t be a permanent fix, and still has its flaws, but it might help with _teaching history to children_, not only from its ability to be _easily explained_, but the method also focuses heavily on the **why** of history and not just the **what happened**, which frankly, is what children tend to be most interested in. Children tend to prefer to know _why_ and _how_ things work than just what they are. It would also then help build a framework for later historical study- by starting out with examining _why_ historical events happen, the children would be better prepared later for analyzing history with _how_ things happen, if they already understand why it happened.

8: as you know, this was not the assignment, but that's fine--i'm just going to mark it like a regular comment, and as such it's solid. this could be even stronger by giving more specific examples from what marx is saying to back up your claim that it's a great tool for motivating the study of history. also, it would be useful to comment on historical precedent for going BEYOND basic needs--as basic needs are fulfilled, other "needs" tend to become a new focus. it doesn't detract from your argument at all, but in fact pushes it even further. 
