### Marxism as Revolutionary
Jerome T. Mondragon

The ideas of Marx is a revolutionary concept which could not exit at any other time period. Socialism can't materialize without the conditions of the Industrial Revolution such as technological advancements, greater division amoung the classes, terrible working conditions, and the consciousnous of the working class. As E.P. Thompson points out, "The physical instruments of production were seen as giving rise in a direct and more-or-less compulsive way to new social relationships, institutions, and cultural modes." (Thompson p. 46)

There are certain conditions in which socialism can unfold. In his writing, Karl Marx mentions 4 stages of history: ancient, fuedal, capitalism, and socialism. Certain conditions must unfold before another stage can begin. (Green and Troup p. 34) Also, the lower classes must become aware of their oppression. Their consciousness is necessary to overthrow the dominant class and gain control of the economic process. (Green and Troup p. 36) 

Inequalites between the classes have existed for centuries. In the _Mediterranean_, Fernand Braudel mentions that explains the disadvantages between the mountain dwellers of the Mediterranean mountains and the lowland inhabitants. "Mountain poverty was the great spur of this journey downwards ...there lies an obvious disparity of living standards.' to the advantage of the Mediterranean plains." (Braudel, p. 109) Thus, the mountain dweller is regarded as the "laughing stock of the superior inhabitants of the town." (Braudel p. 108) Even though these inequalities have existed, the mountain dwellers could not initiate the next stage of Capitalism without technological improvements and awareness. 

Industrialization prooves that Marxism can only exist during this time period. As E.P. Thompson points out in _Exploitation_, the era ushered in technological advancements and economic growth. (Thompson p. 47) The most obvious symbol of the Industrial Revolution is the cotton-mill. This product created more goods and at a faster rate than ever before. (Thompson p. 46) As a result of these advancements, it, it created a system of exploitation. Marx mentions, "The hand-mill gives you society with the fuedal lord: the steam-mill, society with the industrial capitalist. (Thompson p. 44) Thus, employers rule as monarchs by profiting from workers' labor, keeping their pay low, and keeping their moral non-existant. An employee must retain his job in order to obtain reproductive needs which inludes food, clothing, and shelter. (Rockmore 490) The employee must ultimately submit to his employer's bidding because they can't escape the ruthless cycle. Therefore, these social rifts exist because 

created dreadful working conditions. Working conditions in the factories are worse than those experienced by plantation slaves. Wheras slaves work outside and might get a cool breeze, factory workers are locked in hot and unventilated rooms for hours. (Thompson p. 55) 

Despite these vast inequalities and horid working conditions, it is necessary to initiate the final stage Socialism. The masses must be awakened from their current status and conditions to eventually seize control of the economic process. Only then conditions of life be improved and can true freedom be obtained. (Rockmore 492-493)

8: the second half of your comment is mostly summary, which should be exchanged for continuing the argument present in the first 3 paragraphs, and thus give you space to provide more historical detail. or at least you should more clearly relate your summary comments to your arugment that marx is a revolutionary thinker. you have a great set up in showing that Marxism is very time specific and couldn't have emerged before, which you could develop even further.

