(Extremely late submission, well past timeline requirement)
### Marxist History-Revolution from Within

“**THE HISTORY OF ALL hitherto existing society is the history of class struggles”** (Marx, Communist Manifesto pg. 7). Karl Marx, although influenced by the works of his contempories, past philosophers (Hegel), and Enlghtment era historians (Giambattista Vico), was indeed **revolutionary** in his approach to history. I argue that Marx was the first to truly consider the role of the working class in relation to economic development of society. The conflicts of this working class, the **Proletariat**, and the elite class controlling them, the **Bourgeoise**, are the driving forces within human history. Marx was not looking at the laboring classes from a nationalist perspective as previous historians and scholars had. The economy of history in particular and the struggle to meet the material human needs of the Proletariat class drove human societies to advance and decline. Humans became the makers of their own history without any real control or consciousness of it **(Marx, The Eighteenth Brumaire of Louis Bonaparte)**. Marx changed the way historians considered the past and more importantly the people within it.

By focusing on the economic relationships of history rather than politics and tribalism (like his contemporary Leopold von Ranke), Karl Marx influenced historians to re-examine the past and the progress of human history. **Humanity is a "history of industry and exchange** (Houses pg. 33).  The view of the laboring classes was previously viewed from a nationalist perspective (Houses pg 42). Instead, Marx viewed history in the context of economic classes with individuals being the products of their environment. As Rockmore concludes of Marx, that people are defined by their economic roles or functions. "Human history is a further “product” composed of the actions of human beings within the social context over time (Rockmore, Pg. 491).  

It is also the reach of Marx's influence that was so revolutionary. Marx prompted a **"new social history"** to be developed which represented everyone (not just ruling elites), and expanded historical knowledge with information from other fields of study such as sociology and economics (FHTH, pg. 21). Due to the weight of his arguments entire periods of history were reexamined and reframed. The feudal system of the middle ages, the french revolution, industrial advancement leading into the modern era (FHTH pg. 89, 90) could all be explained based on the struggles of the Bourgeoise to advance their rule and the Proliteriat to meet those demands or rise against them. As Popkin argued, **"Even historians who rejected his socialist ideas were influenced by his insistence on the close connection between economic changes and transformations in social structure and politics"** (FHTH, pg 89). Marx's ideas became one of the central narratives within history, an idea which must be argued for or against regardless of historical context.

Marx's radical view of history has affected not only historical writings, but the thoughts of social scientists and activists of the modern era for better or worse. Whether one agrees with his arguments or not, his multidisciplinary proletatariat-centric approach must always be considered alongside more traditional avenues of historical inquiry.

10: excellent historical references to contextualize what marx is doing historiographically. i would like to have seen a bit more elaboration on the ideas or figures that influenced marx, so that you can show how he is significantly deviating even from his most direct influences.
