**Karl Marx's theories on history and what defined societies during the nineteenth-century were a radical concept for its time and later revolutionized historiography in the twentieth century.** While Marx's theories may have their foundation in the philosophies of Hegel and Vico, his emphasis on the economy was groundbreaking, and the scholars that followed in his footsteps exemplified his ideas through their historical works.

While Marx never clearly defined his historiographical theories in a concise book, his ideas can be reconstructed from his writings overall (Rockmore, p. 488; _Houses of History_ p. 34). For Marx, **the real historical subject was the discovery of the proletariat and different economic roles in the productive process** (Rockmore, p. 488; _Houses_ p. 36). Many historians, such as Christopher Hill, coming out of the post-war period, Marxism made _"better sense of the world situation than anything else"_ (_Houses_, p 36). Popkin notes the significance Marx had on other historians, "even historians _who rejected his socialist ideas_ were influenced by his insistence on the close connection between economic changes and transformations in social structures and politics" (Popkin, p 89).

**Marx believed that the economic structure of society formed the foundation for all other aspects of society** (_Houses_, pg 35, Rockmore, p 491). Marx's theories starkly contrasted with his contemporaries, such as **Leopold von Ranke**, whose "scientific historiography was focused on past politics and states" (Lorenz, p 385). Marx argued that politics were not the driving force behind historical change, but rather the ways humans meet their material needs (_Houses_, p 35). Marx used this theory not only to examine the past into clear epochs, but predict the future with the fall of capitalism and rise of communism (Popkin, p 89, Rockmore, p 492).

During the early 1950's, Marxist theorists would cover a wide range of subjects and focus on "history from below" (_Houses_, pg 33-35). While the Annales School also focused on common people, they did not include the economic analysis, and it's connection to humanity present Marxist theory (_Houses_, p 91). These historians focused on Marx's premise that **"'history of humanity' must also be studied and treated in relation to the history of industry and exchange"** (_Houses_, p 35). For example, Marxist historian E.P. Thompson's work, _The Making of the English Working Class_, analyzed the economic factors present in the industrialization of England and the response experienced by those who were affected by the economic upheavals (_Houses_, p 39). This emphasis contrasts Braudel's thesis which also studied the economic structures of the Mediterranean. However, Braudel focused on how geography impacted the social and economic structures within a society, not how the economic structures impacted society (_Houses_, p 91, Popkin, p 118). Thare are of course some historians, philosophers, or schools that have similarities to Marxist theories, however **Marxim is genuinely unique and revolutionary for historical writing and impact on the discipline as a whole.** 

10: very well written and grounded in the readings. i would like to have seen a bit more about how marx could be seen as evolutionary so that you can counter those arguments, but otherwise excellent work. 
