### Marx's Role in the Evolution of Historiography

Despite the staunch position of Engels and many Marxists like him, **the historiographic work of Marx himself was _not_ revolutionary**, but rather a reasonable and organic evolution in the field. The work of Marx was, in many ways, reactionary to the focus on history from the perspective on the bourgeoisie (Popkin p. 88; Rockmore pp. 488-89). While the socialist philosopher brought methodology and focus to a new field of history, _the reactionary element in itself discredits the notion of revolutionary_, rather than evolutionary. Marx’s contributions, though quite different than his predecessors, were a development and new take on what had been produced before. Before him, Ranke focused on political historiography (Popkin p. 79); Marx found his niche in social and economic determinism, while Braudel of the Annales School was focused on geography (Green/Troup p. 90).

Evolutionary history (which I would argue, is all history), builds off the work of those before them, whether in agreement or conflict. **“like other philosophers, Marx reacts to, evaluates, criticizes, reformulates, and carries forward themes in the then contemporary debate, including the discussion of history”** (Rockmore p. 489). If one were to accept this statement as truth, it becomes quite difficult to characterize Marx as revolutionary in historiographical terms. One must not conflate the ideas and philosophies of Marx with his historiographical contributions. While the argument can be made for the radical and progressive qualities of his philosophies, there is not a one-for-one translation to the world of history (Green/Troup p. 35).

The paradigms and perspectives of Marx developed from a resentment of capitalism and the flaws of elitist vertical social hierarchies. According to Marx, production and materialism define capitalistic societies, and people are bound to work harder than they need to, in order to serve and benefit those in power (Rockmore p. 490). Without evaluating the implications of Marxist philosophies, one can recognize the evolutionary nature of his mantras. Without the domination of the elites – and, by extension, their monopoly on historiography – Marx’s ideas would hardly be considered revolutionary, if they had come about at all. **Rather than view his notions on societal structure and its representation in the historical record as ground-breaking, it is more accurate to evaluate his work as reactionary**. Furthermore, it is crucial to distinguish the actual works of Marx from those produced in his name years after his death (Rockmore p. 496). In fact, the “revolutionary” quality of Marx’s work was hardly recognized until the mid-20th century with the rise of Soviet Russia and various social movements from labor to women’s rights (Popkin p. 91; Green/Troup p. 90; Rockmore p. 489). Over the years, much has been taken of Marxism and built upon further, just as had been done by Marx himself from historians before.
