## Marxism

### Evolution Comment

Much like how the Rankean methodology focused on political history with primary sources, and the *Annales* school of thought split in the opposite direction to a *total history*, elements of Marxism drew heavily from the past. Marxism is not a complete fracture from the historical norm, it is an evolution with a means to an end goal for humanity. Aspects of Marxism were seen throughout history, as well as the groundwork that provided for its existence. 

Greco-Roman historians knew the importance of the argument “what is history?”. Both Herodotus and Thucydides agreed that history should only be of exceptional events of importance (Popkin, p. 27-28). Even Roman historians Tacitus and Ammianus Marcellinus believed “the task of history is to deal with prominent events” (Roman Foundations p. 64). This is a common theme all throughout historical work until the 19th century. Marxism certainly aligns with this ideal seeing an intense focus on economy, and while the proletariat class is frequently mentioned, no actual significance is given to it without context of the overarching economy. To Marxists, **history is economy**. 

History in the middle ages was defined by its adherence to religious belief and its ability to conduct moral lessons (Popkin, p. 39). An important lesson is that history was being used for a distinct purpose, to teach morality under Christianity. This parallels to **Marxism’s treatment of history as a means to an end**, to properly achieve *freedom* and reconnect with nature (Rockmore, p. 493).

Rhetoric once again became a mainstay of historical work during the Renaissance. Machiavelli focused on a secular and humanist approach (Popkin, p. 51). **Marxists would applaud Machiavelli not for his beliefs, but for how he utilized history as reasoning for his ideals.** Marxists believe in “theoretically informed empiricism,” their interpretation of history was only used as material and proof in the overall theory of Marxism, and the future of humanity (Houses, p .40). 

Leopold Von Ranke’s emphasis on scientific historiography in the 19th century naturally focused on concrete evidence in the form of written documents. To Ranke, history should be “documentary, not speculative” (Gil p. 385). Ranke insisted on professionalism in historiographical research, affirming that history can only be “learned through specific training” (Popkin p. 78). Marx conducted his work in contemporary with Ranke, and despite radically opposing views on history, have much in common. While Ranke focused on political history with primary sources, Marxists emphasized economics as the backbone to human history. The Annales school of thought paralleled this, with their emphasis on total history. **Marxism, the Annales, and Ranke are all three different evolutions of historical writing in the 19th and 20th century, each having split in different ways.** For Ranke, reliable primary sources and indisputable political documents were the forefront of his argument during the mass expansion of education in the 19th century. Similarly, Marx’s argument of economic determinism had many listeners in the age of the Industrial Revolution and economic class imbalance. To Marxists, history has a distinct purpose. Marxism clearly states that history ends with communism, and eventually *evolves* to that point naturally through capitalism. Marxism is yet another evolution to historical thought, but it is the only one that places importance on the end result. 

10: the one thing i think you could improve here is to say more explicitly how marx is doing what had been done before, rather than just pointing the historical precedent (esp true for paragraphs 2-4)---all excellent points, but be a bit more specific about what marx is doing. that kind of specificity greatly strengthens an argument.
