# The Annales Questions
1. Braudel's oceanic metaphor for describing his "long duree" theory about the incremental change of environments is one that is still studied more than ever in history thanks to archeaology. This is an aspect of history that is occasionally referenced as some civilizations were known to die out or abandon settlements due to climate changes, but is not explored in depth as a concept. Does our basic primary history education need to discuss this concept more due to our current situation with climate and resources or as some of Braudel's oponents suggest is this methodology inherently flawed due to its exclusion of individual human narrative? (Greeen 88)
2. Critics of "Histoire Probleme" and the Annales historians in general center their criticisms on the fact that this type of methodology focuses very heavily on quantative data that is obtained through measurable things like environmental change and explicit historical records. What is more important to communicating history in a way that modern people can relate? Does personal narrative provide a more relatable experience or is it too limited and is group history a more complete picture or too impersonal? As a historian where should you look to zoom into individual narrative and when is summarizing group activities more applicable? (Green 91)
3. One of the biggest criticisms of the Annales historians is that their methodology works fine for more ancient civilizations but falls short in the modern world which changes quickly and significantly due to technology. Humans now have the ability to fundamentally physically alter landscapes and wage war and achieve international communication on a simpler and larger scale than ever before. With more humans being literate than ever before and having access to the ability to chronicle their own experiences is the "mentalitie" method of recording history still relevent or has the act of chronicling the common man transcended historians as people now have the access to recording their own personal histories and lives themselves? How much do we need historians to construct the jumble of modern future historical sources into a more cohesive narrative if at all? (Green 93)
4. Fernand Braudels history of the Mediterranian is extremely focused on geographic elements to explain the motivations of humans throughout history. In the opening pages he focuses on examining how mountains have harbored communities for centuries whom are unwilling to submit to centralized authority. With the ability to view the world from a 3D scale thanks to satellite imaging should a next stage of historical method revision include more engagement with images of landscape in order to place events in context? Often events that were environment critical have that context portrayed in text which can be confusing and abstract, how much could history benefit from a greater emphasis on visual learning? (Green 98-101)
5. Overall one of the hallmarks of the Annnales historians' work is that they signal a trend in specializing narratives and history to more specific aspects. Most non-historian citizens learn their historical framework in a more general timeline sense, in this way histoire total is more used in basic instruction even though it is not popular in academia. Is it actually helpful to try to teach history in its most basic form this way? Is it better to attempt to convey things in an overall summary or does it lend itself more to misinformation and establishment bias? Would smaller histories associated with larger events be a better way at communicating the gravity and actuality of events or does our current broad summary method have its benefits?

9: very good background and questions that encourage critical analysis of annales contributions. be sure to use bold and italics to highlight key ideas
