# Marxist Historiography: A Evolution
The new school of Marxist historiography which arose in the earlier part of the 20th century is one that like all other schools of historiography draws upon and is a natural evolution of past methodology. The two cornerstones which form Marxist historiography are a focus in material history as well as human agency and how the two intersect in the arena of class. The legacy which set the precedent for these main points of interest within Marxist historiography can be traced all the way back to the "father" of histioriography Herodotus who believed "all aspects of human life could potentially be of historical interest" (Popkin 28). 
Marxist historiography also emphasizes cycles of human/political organization which slowly repeat and manifest themselves in material stratification. This idea of cycles which churn slowly over the course of several generations of people is nothing new, the Roman historian Polybius is one of the first known historians to introduce the concept of organizational cycles (Popkin 36). While historians ideas of what these cycles are is varied the general premise is the same and all iterations maintain a link between these cycles and material culture in some way. For example the annale historian Braudel's cyclical theory is predicated more on geology than Human artifices but still is inexorably linked to material culture as he points out that geography and what resources are avaiable inevitably shape how stratified a society is. (Green 90) Even someone like Machiavelli and his contemporary Guiciarrdini can be seen as helping shape the legacy of Marxist historiography. Part of what made the Italian renaissance historiographers different from their Medieval counterparts was that human agency served as the driving force for all of the histories they recorded. (Popkin 50) The shift in historiography of eliminating a divine timeline or using divine machinations as the basis of explanation for events was significant and would form an important foundation for the Marxist school. Perhaps one of the most important historians when considering the legacy of Marxist historiography is Giambattista Vico whose work established History as a field which is distinct due to the fact that as humans we have insight into other humans' actions and behaviors thus allowing us to analyze it in a depth which is entirely impossible with the natural sciences. (Popkin 60) This distinction would be crucial to Marxist histiorography in that it makes it possible to use materialism to interpret past events. This is due to the fact that even if we cannot know 100% what a past person's motivations where there are some aspects of life (food, habitation and clothing) which are so central to the human experience that as people we can easily understand the motivation for a group of people attacking another in the hopes of stealing food whether we have explicit record that this was their motivation or not. (Green 34) This understanding of the human experience is perhaps the most important part of Marxist historiography being an evolution rather than a revolution of historic methodology. Understanding human agency allows revisionism in History because it takes away the need to have explicit documentation and concrete evidence for every claim. It also allows documents to be questioned and critiqued based on what we fundamentally know about people. It is what allows us to dispute the accuracy of histories written to embellish in favor of a particular group despite no written evidence supporting these revisions. It is through this that Marxist Histioriography was born, becoming a combination of past histirocal ideas such as the interest in the common person, interest in class, the cyclical nature of human organization and society as well as a focus on human agency. Marxist historiography can also be characterized by the precedents it rejects which are the rigid citation of "scientific historiography" as well as the enlightenment idea of History being a clean arc which is always progressing for Humans. Overall Marxist historiography in these ways can be seen as an ideological successor to already established schools of thought within history and what defines its uniqueness is the way it forms an amalgam by combining bits and pieces of the work of so many historians before it. 
