**The Houses of History:** The Annales School (pgs. 87-109)

Comment

Historians within the innovative **Annales** school, whilst progressive in theorhetical and methodlogical principles, were still limited in their attempt to obtain a _**histoire totale**_; although impressive, the task is ultimately impossible. Conceptual and institutional founders **Lucien Febvre** and **Marc Bloch** admirably incorporated a breakdown of the human sciences within history and rejected the complete emphasis of history upon merely diplomatic and and political topics. **Fernand Braudel** was also innovative in that he placed a heavy emphasis upon a multi-layered chronology and was a proponent of quantative history. The 'Third Generation' of the Annales school emphasized on the concept of _mentalites_, or the conscious and unconscious mental structures and collective beliefs systems of past societies.(P.88-89) The notions of analyzing both the material and mental structure of society, which includes examining geographical background, as well as, social, cultural, and political aspects pf particular societies is much more "total" than that in the past of the **Renaissance** or the **Enlightenment**. The Annales school historians are expanding general concepts of history and emcompassing much more than in past, yet all aspects of a society, which is necessary for a _total history_, were not thoroughly incorporated into every historians approach within the school. 

Each historian placed an emphasis on particular and distinct methods and to gain a complete history, one must use many methods and interpret, disucss, and analyze and must not omit certain aspects of history based off preference. Historians choose their topic, their documents, and their methods based off their current positions and standing.(Pg. 92) This is exactly why a total history is impossible. For example, **Braudel**, with his emphasis of quantative data, omitted key topics crucial to total history such as culture, agriculture, law and religion. Also, he placed an emphasis on the environmental impact on society, rather than the emphasis on humans themselves, which are the creators and initiators of history itself. In many cases, historians at the time unveiled structures of change, rather than explantions of change. Also, much of the quantitative data discusses focuses on groups rather than the individual. Fractional histories by various histories can potentially be combined to be a near-total history, but historians individually are forced to narrow their interets and limit both subject and method.The concept of _mentalites_, which foregrounded the notion of emphasis on ordinary people's own experience of their lives, allowed insight into the inner working of a society. To gain a more full perspective, a balance between quantatative data, ecological dtermination, and the agency of people must be combined to even attempt to gain a "total history" of the world and human existance. The subject of _mentalites_ was the Annales' means of addressing the major issue of objectivity and subjectivity, which gets historians and historiographers closer to a historical "truth." 
