Elena Farmin 

Comment: *Houses*, “The *Annales*,” p. 87-109

One of the greatest accomplishments of the Annales school was the creation of a history that examined the importance of all aspects of human society (politics, economics, culture, language, etc.), a “total history.” However, several passages in the chapter mention how members of the Annales group were criticized for excluding certain aspects from their works, particularly gender. For example: The Mediterranean and the Mediterranean World in the Age of Philip II by the “Annaliste” Fernand Braudel was criticized for focusing solely on geography and environment while omitting more human elements of the region’s history (such as the culture and laws of the peoples of the Mediterranean). 


This begs the question of whether or not there can be a “total history.” Much like the question of whether or not historians can be truly objective, it is a complicated topic that requires acknowledging all sorts of factors. It is admirable that the members of the Annales school incorporated other social sciences into history so as to make the discipline all the more comprehensive. Of course, that means that historians should study other fields besides history. Still, no person can either engage in or fully comprehend every discipline known to humankind. That is not to say that historians should not be criticized for ignoring societal aspects that could have added greater depth to their writings (Braudel could have elaborated on the social and cultural barriers between highland and lowland peoples in the Mediterranean). With history becoming more interdisciplinary, more facets of society need to be addressed. While historians should not be writing about fields that are out of their element, they should still display some understanding of disciplines beyond history.


While only briefly mentioned in The Houses of History, Popkin explains how the Annales school did not have someone like Mary Beard. Since neither reading mentions any female “Annalistes,” it can be assumed that there were none (Popkin, p. 112-113). One does not have to be a woman to write a great work on gender, but being a man is no excuse for not bringing any attention to the contributions of women throughout history. For a group that was all about acknowledging ordinary people throughout history, it seems counterintuitive that they should ignore half the human population. Being men of their time, the Annalistes could have taken patronizing (or misogynistic) tones regarding female historical figures, but even Herodotus believed that women were worthy of “historical interest” (Popkin, p. 28).

