

This week on our journey through historiography we’ve read *Houses of History* by Anna Green and Kathleen Troup. Our chapter delves into the *Annales*, a French historical society/school that dedicated intense research and scholarship into the progression of historical professionalization. **The Annales work gives the direct foundations to today’s current historical framework**. There is an obsessive theme to the methods in which the historians of the Annales,who deeply scrutinized not only their sources but the works of other members (P.88-9). The work of the Annales is a neccesary experiment in the historical profession. An experiment that shows the origin of the self-correcting nature of modern scholarship. **The synthesis and rejection of historical truths is the fundamentally crucial element to the legitimacy of historical research.**  

Our recent discussions have been critically focused on the elements of legitimacy found in history. Without a doubt modern historical foundations crave the appreciation and acceptance of their work as legitimate. So much of historical practice is steeped in a scientific approach to research yet we have already mastered elements of the science by our process of peer review. **The ability to have colleagues dissect your work has become crucial piece in our practice**. *We've learned heavily from the influence of groups like the Annales, just within our own hyper-critical approach to peer review.* Historians outside the Annales could easily engage and dispute their methods and theory simply on the basis of critique (P.90). The critiques of peers allow all readers to gain new perspectives in their own research finding practices and writing techniques to avoid or engage with.

The obsessive nature in how historians will thoroughly dissect fellow academic research is intimidating but it also serves as our progression. The deep scrutiny (and potentially off-putting) element of historical research. **The process of historical peer review has become organic simply by allowing historians to easily synthesize massive ranges of historical data and scholarship into larger truths pulled from the chaos.**

*Without the synthesis of the historical data we would lose the narrative elements in our literature.* Braudel’s passage *Mountain freedom*, exercises the early experimentation in piecing together a narrative practice with mounds of data. While it may seem boring in the slog of information bombarding the reader, his story paints a rich picture dutifully culture mapping the Mediterranean. In the process the Mediterranean becomes a picturesque scene of diverse historical backround brought tied together through a narrative. **Historical literature relies on narrative, and without it we get pieces of garbled nonsense leaving us with a question of so what?**


7: we talked a lot about peer review when discussing Ranke and professionalization--how does that tie into the Annales? Then you end up taking about narrative and synthesis, but i'm not sure what point you are trying to make other than they are important--but would anyone disagree? interesting ideas, but needs more focus.
