### The _Annales_ School – Summary

- The French historical school of thought - _The Annales School_ – emphasized a more holistic approach to historiography. **While it understood the importance of documentation and evidence, The _Annales_ embraced unwritten history and branched away from a focus on purely political focus, to historiography that included economic and social elements.** _No longer was the focus of history on the nobility alone, but rather, on the interactions between elites and the common folk_ (Erikson pp. 87-88).

- The _Annales_ great work of accomplishment was _The Mediterranean and the Mediterranean World in the Age of King Phillip II_ (Erikson p. 87). **Though some regarded the ‘total history’ as a progressive step in the evolution of historiography, others critiqued it, citing the impossibility of a truly ‘complete’ history**, and noting elements that were overlooked, such as cultural, religious, and agrarian topics, as well as law (Erikson p. 90).

Stemming from the desire to break from nationalistic, politically-motivated history, The _Annales_ School sought to focus on the lower-classes of the state. _A break from strict scientific method and rigidity allowed historians in the school of thought to explore different perspective and alternative approaches to historiography_ (Popkin pp. 110-112).

- Within the _Annales_ group, a more quantitative and focused directive arose, looking to solve the problems of history (Erikson p. 91). At the time, critics accused these historians of only analyzing that which can be counted. Later, groups developed which looked more closely at the qualitative social workings of people in history (Erikson p. 92). In many respects, **such a divide persists today, in many disciplines of humanities and social sciences** (Erikson p. 93).

- Some critics of the _Annales_ posit that, while the historiographical school has its merits, it is generally unable to keep pace with constantly developing modern societies (Erikson p 93). The school has been criticized as “_ferociously, aggressively global in scope, both in its recruitment of contributors and in its choice of topics to pursue_” (Erikson p. 94).

- **Geography is central to the formation and reach of political order and, therefore, understanding of geography is essentially for the writing of ‘good’ history.** _The Annals School_ was notably recognized for its focus on this aspect of history (Erikson pp. 88-90). In _The Mediterranean_, these assertions are made clear through analysis of mountains and the role they play determining the freedom of people – a product of geographical division (Braudel pp. 98-99).

- _The Mediterranean_ focuses on a multitude of geographic attributes that contribute to the differences in historic political structure. Whether the mountains (Braudel pp. 98-108) or the forests (Braudel pp. 103-104), **to better understand the dynamics of people, history can and should be viewed through various lenses – geography being one.**
