### The Annales School
  The geographical narrative of history given by Fernand Braudel, student of Febvre, takes away from the historical points he is trying to make. Braudel focuses on quantitative and geographical history (p.2529). Braudel explains historical narratives through using geography as a guide. 
  The foundations laid in 1929 for The Annales School, by professors **Lucien Febvre** and **Marc Bloch** (p. 2499), changes how history can be told. These two professors change the historical narrative by writing 'total histories'. These histories include all aspects of human life. This type of writing allows the reader to gain knowledge about the geography of a certain area, as well as the people who occupied the land during a specific period. The author, Anna Green, states that this regressive method of writing emerged from The Annales School of thought (p. 2514).
  This regressive method of writing allows the historian to begin in the present and work backward. Although Braudel's *The Mediterranean* is **groundbreaking in openeing up the ways in which one can narrate history**, his tendency to write history with an **emotional overtone** overpowers the historical message that is meant to come through.While reading his excerpt, I repeatedly lost the historical message he is trying to tell. I am not sure if I am reading a geography textbook and learning about the rocks that make up certain mountains, or reading about mountain peoples and learning about their culture. **This type of narrative has too much going on!**
  Although The Annales School allows for a broader scope to history, **to what extent does it allow too much freedom for historians' writing style?** Braudel writes in a tone that seems more appropriate for literature narratives. He **romanticizes his narrative** and thus never really is able to make a definitive point. This expression of emotion shows a lack of objectivity. A useful historical narrative should aim to not be emotional or confusing. I appreciate Braudel and his contributions to history, however, I do not believe his emotional method to writing is useful in historical narratives. 
