# Chinese Historiography Outline
*  "It may be said that in China historiography is an entity separate from Chinese history itself: it has a life of its own almost independent of dynastic upheavals and institutional changes. As Yu Ying-shih has put it, 'Chinese historiography has two major characteristics: The first is that it has had a long history, and the second is that the historiographic tradition has its own continuous strain, not to be interrupted by political and social changes" (Chang 156) Chinese Historiography is one that has a longer written and continuous intellectual legacy than any other on earth. Chinese historiography has always been known to be a quantitative history of facts mixed with strong mythical-historical narrative.
*  Thesis: Chinese historiography is one of a long legacy of striving for factual accuracy that transcends political agenda or the prevailing ideology of the ruling dynasty. It can be argued that the past two centuries have contained the largest scale changes in the intellectual tradition of historiography in China. (Chang 156-158) The official introduction of Marxist ideology into historiography in 1949 has created the largest upheaval in the tradition as state pressure has forced historians to radically shift their language and focus of how history is interpreted. Between Marxism and globalism Chinese historiography exists at a crucial turning point of pluralism and mass reform in how it views the history of China.
*  **The 19th century started a mass turn in Chinese Historiographical writings as Manchu anti-intellectual reforms forced authors to divert into different mediums of recording history.** Among them personal and micro histories began to be produced on larger scales, this factor would be very important in the later Marxist revolution of all schools of thought in china mid 20th century. Mongolian history was also studied in much larger detail due to a decrease in stigma against Mongols and many documents from the middle east were translated to learn more about Mongolian history. (Teng 133-135)
*  The introduction of scientific archaeology in China beginning in 1920 would prove a significant development in Chinese historiography as **mythical historical narratives that had been unquestioned for centuries began to be re-examined and questioned with a new reformed liberalism that was unprecedented in the intellectual tradition of china.** Scientific archaeology would also be very significant in post 1949 historiography as a government sponsored entity which was used through specifically Marxist lenses in a new found effort to study the common peasants life rather than important emperors or famous historical figures. (Chang 161-168)
*  **The introduction of Marxism in 1949 fundamentally changed Chinese historiography in all aspects.** The organization of how the Chinese divide and label their history was entirely changed and standardized to fit into Marxist ideology. *Marxist themes such as class struggle, the glory of the common man and anti imperialism became mandatory lenses in which historians are still beholden to portray the past in.* (Dirlik 227-267;465-488)
*  **Modern globalism has meant that post-modern ideas of historiography and the gradual questioning of traditionalist approaches as well as marxist approaches of historiography have began to surface steadily since the 1980s.** This has created large intellectual conflicts with the state Marxist ideological censors and continues to stoke the unprecedented period of reform and revisitation which is currently happening within Chinese historiography. (Huaiyin 336-360) (Feurwerker 31-61)
