## Second-wave Feminism and Historiography
**Thesis:** My section of the textbook will look at the contributions and changes that feminist historians made, specifically during second-wave feminism. Up until second-wave feminism began questioning the accepted methodologies in history, the positionality of the male historian was not questioned. “Humanity is male, and man defines woman, not in herself, but in relation to himself” (Beauvoir, pg. 26). Women, throughout much of history, had been defined by the men that surrounded them, but when feminist historians began to look at the categorization of history, they pushed for a fundamental change in the way that history was illustrated. Through the lens of postmodernism, second-wave feminism and feminist historians would *fundamentally* change historiography by knocking it off the center of the white male. *(This needs work)*

1. **Second-wave Feminism:** The beginning of this monumental change in historiography would be a combination of postmodern thought, as well as the creation of second-wave feminism. Authors like Beauvoir and Friedan would put a new spin on gender history, and question the societal norm of the sexes. Second-wave would take feminism further than fighting for suffrage, they would begin to question the male dominated world. This trend would sweep into history, because without history, women were “trapped in a present where oppressive social relations appear natural and inevitable. Knowledge of history is knowledge that things have changed and do change” (Green and Troup, pg. 253). *(I would like to narrow this topic down, I am just unsure how)*
2. **Femininity and Masculinity:** One of the groundbreaking ways to look at history was through the lens of gender. Gender, being a social construct, would constantly change and fluctuate throughout history, giving historians a new way to understand the societal norms of the time. Under the general prevue of gender is the concept of femininity and masculinity. Both would change over time, but would come to have a set of characteristics that aligned with one or the other. Looking at history, and historical figures, and figuring out the different norms that meant feminine or masculine at that time, would become a new way of studying the past. This would impact historiography, not only because of increasing intersectionality, but also by recognizing the positionality of historians today, and how these ideas have continually changed and morphed over time. 
3. **Intersectionality in late second-wave:** During the later 1970's, and during the time that would eventually be classified as third-wave feminism, women of color began to speak out and recognize the problems with essentialism. Essentialism in feminism meant assuming that the struggles of middle-class white women were the struggles of *all* women, when in fact, race and class play incredibly important roles (Green and Troup, pg. 255). Historiography changes with the times, and because of the growing recognition of intersectionality in many different fields, it would also bleed into the study of history. 
