# The Annales School
- [Intro]
  In the early twentieth-century a group of historians known as the *Annales School* revolutionized the field of historiography with a new approach and methodology of how to study history. The methods they introduced challenged traditional historical focus from prominent and powerful individuals, and shed light on often overlooked or dismissed populations and cultures. To achieve this they developed methodologies that examined evidence of broader beliefs, ideas, and attitudes of common everyday people. 
  - Foundation and creation of the Annales School
   -Febvre and Bloch challenge the monopolistic nature of Feench history that had traditional been heavily reliant on political and diplomatic themes ( HoH p.87). They sought to rehumanize history by acknowledging cultural and economic dynamics. This would culminate in what would be refferred to as *total history*. 
  - Braudel introduces an emphasis on quanititative history. His publication, *The Mediterranian*, is used as an alegory to explain his thesis of "historical time". He seperates these histrical times into three different layes he refers to as the three *durees* (HoH p.89).
  - Annales historians such as Goubert and Duby recognize the computer as a tool to greatly expand upon the field of quantitative historical research. These scholars would evolve their emphasis from total history to problem-solving history. This emphasized using computerized data to search for important causal factors in historical evidence. (HoH p.91)
  - In the 1970's the Annales would innovate again with a new direction that examined the underlying experience of common people of past civilizations. This helped to create a picture of the inner workings of societies by creating context through the underlying values and attitudes held by the people who made up those societies. This concept is what the Annales referred to as *mentalites*. 
  - Annales in the current era has again been evolving and the latest iteration combines many ideas from previous generations in what is being referred to as *Annales: Histoire, Sciences, Sociales.* It is not yet clear what the cumination of these ideas will ultimately shape into during this current evolution, but the Annales School continues it's legacy of innovation and influence into a new generation of historians.
