### Historical Sociology
- **Introduction**. This essay will focus on the mid to late 20th century. In the introduction to my essay I will explain what historical sociology is defined as and the four characteristics that historical sociological studies focus on (Greene, p.3127). I am also going to explain the nature of this field and the part that conflict sociology plays in it. My discussion on conflict theory will lead me to briefly discuss Marx. Lastly, I will discuss the relationship between history and sociology. **Attempted Thesis**: Historical Sociology is a discipline that focuses on change in societies and allows the scholar to understand the historical reasoning behind societal change. 
- **What is historical sociology?** Historical sociology is a history that explains and describes a social change (Greene, p.3127). The four characteristics that Skocpol uses to explain this discipline are 1. asking questions about social phenomenon that go against what we know 2. longitudinal studies and temporal oder matter 3. actions and structures are what matter and 4. focus patterns of change (Greene, p.3127).
- **Conflict Sociology**. Conflict theory drives this type of sociology and is focused on conflicts between classes (need citation from sociology text book). Marxist history plays on this exactly and therefore Marx is important to this part of my essay (need more research on Marx). The nature of historical sociology is focused on understanding how societies have formed throughout history and what patterns they follow. Historical sociologists study topics that center on **politics and their power dynamics.**
- **History & Sociology**. It is very important to understand these two disciplines individually to better understand them as a collective. As mentioned above, historical sociology is a sociology that explains and describes social change. Both disciplines have narratives that explain and describe, however, the difference is the **data and methods** used to create the narrative. Historical sociologists describe historical themes in order to aid in their explanation of social change.
- **Conclusion**. In this section of my essay I will conclude by briefly reviewing the main points I make and close out my argument by restating my thesis.
- **Notes**. I need to work on writing a stronger thesis and also find more sources on Karl Marx and historical sociologists.  
