## The Professionalization of History and its effect on Historiography
- To be clear, these bullet points are concepts and effects of professionalization that I have researched over the past week. I will be sorting them into paragraphs in this fashion:
  - Intro
  - What is professionalization?
  - How did Ranke contribute to it?
	  - Objectivity, source analysis, seminar system, peer review.
  - Other contributors (Burke, Meinecke, Jameson, and hopefully more!). 
  - How did it affect history as a study (other than the obvious professionalization in itself)?
  
- Please let me know if there is any glaring issues you see, and if there's any better way to sort this! There is also a lot of overlap in this outline, will cut down on that when it's essay time!

1. My contribution to this textbook is an overview on the professionalization of history. I will primarily focus on the contributions of Leopold Van Ranke to introducing history as an academic topic, but I will also go the long reaching effects of the professionalization of history, coupled with other historians who built upon Ranke’s foundation.

2. The Nineteenth Century experienced a shift in historical work being brought into an academically professional setting. This elevated history to the forefront of intellectual debate. Notably through the work of German historian Leopold Van Ranke would history become a mainstay on the modern college campus (Cheng, p. 92). His application of the modern seminar system, peer review, modern source critique, and objectivity cumulated in a way that historical methodology had never seen previously. 

3. This proliferation of history as an academic pursuit also created a stark shift in how historical writing was conducted. While previous historians often looked for “absolute truth” or relied on religious or philosophical truths, historians of this era “argued that change was the essence of reality and that each society and every era needed to be understood in terms of its own unique individuality” (Popkin, p. 69). German historian Friedrich Meinecke believed that this line of thinking would put all of history in a new perspective, the “outcome of events is not determined by general laws that human beings cannot alter” (Popkin p. 69). 

4. A rise in nationalist histories came about, partially because of this individuality in categorizing history, from rising nationalist tendencies in the western world, and due to the academic setting providing an avenue to partake in such works (German universities in particular pushed nationalist narratives in their classrooms, due to the formation of the unified Germanic state that occurred during this time) (Popkin, p. 70).

5. Historical professionalization has largely been viewed from a German perspective, due to Ranke’s methodologies being practiced in German universities (Torstendahl, p. 43). As previously stated, no individual had a greater impact on making history an academic pursuit more than Leopold Van Ranke. No name is more associated with the “scientific” turn of history. Ranke knew the importance of distinguishing history and fiction and set out clear guidelines that professionalized history as we know it. Ranke was also the first historian to be recognized for his contributions as a professor at the University of Berlin, not merely as a historian (Popkin, p. 76).

6. To Ranke, history can only be “learned through specific training” (Popkin p. 78). This idea naturally holds history to a higher standard, one that seeks to accurately tell **what actually happened**. In the past, historians conducted their work as a hobby or as a subset of literature or philosophy, the idea of being a historian on its own merit was ludicrous. Ranke was the bridge that gapped this and brought history as an academic practice to fruition. 

7. Ranke’s scientific historiography focused on four main principles: objectivity and a rejection of moralizing, trusting fact over all else, seeing historical events for their uniqueness (divergence over similarity), and maintaining impartiality when referencing political works (Gil p. 384-385).  If asked to sum this up, Ranke would say history is “documentary, not speculative” (Gil p. 385). To Ranke, any evidence that was not empirical should not be considered. This is a stark contrast from previous historical works. Some historians would use very little source material in their works, and Ranke’s shift made historians more accountable for their narratives, who now had to back their work with real information. 

8. Ranke preached a focus on objectivity. He believed that historians should lean centrally on politics in their historical works. Ranke did not believe that historians should “judge the past” and make moral assumptions (Gil, p. 384. Popkin, p. 76). History can only be viewed in terms of its own period, one has to see themselves as an individual of the era they are studying, not of the modern day.

9. Only recognizing concrete evidence as acceptable source material led Ranke to incorporate peer review in his classes. Peer review was conducted through Ranke’s **seminar system**. Before Ranke, history was taught primarily in lecture series. History students were given the narrative but had no instruction on how to create their own. Ranke saw this flaw in history education and created smaller, interpersonal classes where students sat in groups of ten to thirty where they could create their narratives (utilizing the *Rankean Method*) and be subjected to criticism from fellow students. Sound familiar, historiography students? Now, the success of a historical narrative was determined by their fellow peers, not the public or a ruling class (Popkin, p. 79). Historians saw this change as improving the objectivity of their job, as not having to adhere to these overbearing figure’s ideals would allow them to create history beyond the conventions of the public. 

10. In modern terms, the **Rankean Method** is a reconstructionist approach based on creating a story space from historical documents (with a heavy emphasis on primary sources) and evaluating them for inaccuracies through peer review. 

11. This new concern for sources led to a revolution in how documents are preserved and accounted for. Professional archives exploded in popularity, giving historians a much larger pool of sources to draw from (Popkin, p. 80). The establishment of professional history associations and journals such as the United States *American Historical Review* began at this time, setting even higher standards for academic historical work. The *American Historical Reviews* first editor (and the first student to complete a Ph.D. in history at Johns Hopkins University) was J. Franklin Jameson, who played a crucial role in “the professionalization of history by using the journal to establish uniform standards of scholarship” (Cheng, p. 96). Citing factual accuracy, Jameson build upon Ranke’s approach, adding that while historians should attempt to be objective, they never truly could be. 

12. As with any approach to history, there are drawbacks in Ranke’s approach. Even though Ranke vehemently opposed the concept of a “total” or “grand” narrative that encompasses all of humanity, he often is guilty of constructing these overarching narratives anyway. In the seminar classroom, oral histories were discredited as unreliable. While historians often only wrote of their own country in this nationalistic period, this only gave credit to the ideal of non-empirical history (read: non-western history) as unreliable at best. Another dangerous result of “scientism” in history was the rise of narratives concerning racial purity and eugenics. These “racial explanations were frequently advanced to justify historical developments such as European imperial conquests in the rest of the world, the westward expansion of the United States, and slavery and segregation in the American South” (Popkin p. 88). Obviously, a large issue in the scientism of history, racial differences coupled with nationalist ideals to a devastating effect in the late 19th and early 20th century. 

13. An emphasis on objectivity also led to its own slew of problems. A common ideal of the era was that historians should be as non-biased as possible in their work. Unfortunately, this is impossible. The process in which one chooses sources is inherently subjective. The action of including or excluding certain sources automatically raises bias in a narrative. Also, historical facts are only beneficial when presented in a way that is relevant to the narrative at hand. If a fact is presented in an alternate historical context, it could have a completely different meaning. Another downside of focusing on objectiveness is the tendency to rely on political source material. While Ranke did not discredit social and economic factors, but “in his works, they were seen and located in the framework of a political history (Gil, p. 385). This also was a contributing factor to the rise in nationalism, as if all history being taught was political (and nationalistic in narrative, as most German and American histories were at the time). 

14. The elements of scientism and the professionalization of history led to many questioning the legitimacy of historical work conducted in the past with heavy biases or moral lessons (either through religion or nationalist ideals). This uneasiness in relying on past sources created an environment where “the entire history of the past suddenly cried out to be rewritten (Popkin, p. 76). British conservative Edmund Burke believed that these past histories should still be respected, as they are a “better guide for the present than rational maxims” (Popkin p. 72). Many historians still respected their traditions and acknowledge these past works but have garnered a healthy amount of skepticism when it comes to reliability of sources. 



