# Chinese Historiography
For my contribution to the historiographical text I would like to write about modern Chinese historiography and how that relates to larger concepts we have covered in particular postcolonial and Marxist historiography. Chinese historiography no doubt has just as rich and complex of history as the western historiography we learn about in class but is rarely mentioned in our text books. The historiography of China over the last 50 years has produced some very interesting ideas about the study of history particularly in the widespread popularity of the Marxist historiographical model. As dictated by the government the Marxist model in which we have studied forms the main basis for how the Chinese view their own complex history as a series of cyclical periods culminating in the modern era of socialized government. Chinese historiography also relates heavily to post-colonial history as Chinese historians have long worked to have their voice heard in how their nation's history is viewed rather than the longstanding antiquarian narratives provided by historians from the west. The Chinese have been recording written history longer than practically any other historiographical tradition and have gone through many internal paradigm shifts to arrive at their modern Marxist model. Chinese historiography is unique within historical traditions within Asia and throughout the world. By analyzing the nation of China's methodologies specifically we find a fascinating blend of unique Chinese ideas with western created Marxist methods and analyze how a fusion between western methods and eastern traditions came together to create the modern state of Chinese historicism. 
