## **_The Enlightenment_**

### *Abstract*

I aim to describe the **_Enlightenment,_** or the *"Age of Reason"* and the emergence of intellectual traditions and of related new disciplines and its effect on historiography and the perceptions of history. I want to discuss the correlation between history and science, which placed historical knowledge in a more secure foundation, as well as, analysis of what knowledge means during the Enlightenment, and how meaning has changed in regards to approaches, methods, and narratives. The *Enlightenment* served as a sign of modernity and I hope to dissect why and the lasting effects as well as the criticisms of *enlightened* thinking. This period of political, scientific, historical, and philosophical thinking undermined the authority of the monarchy and the Church and paved the way for political and social revolutions, freedom of thought, rational inquiry, critical thinking, and even religious tolerance to a certain extent. I will discuss influential thinkers at the time such as **_Voltaire,_** who shifted focus from diplomatic and military events to social history and achievements in the arts and sciences. Many historians began to focus less on large-scale events and more on culture and the larger picture of the world. I will also discuss the thinking of philosopher **_Immanuel Kant,_** who stated the Enlightenment shed light on *"emancipation of the human consciousness from an immature state of ignorance"* and who also viewed universal history as a whole, coherent unit. Also, I will express the role the Enlightenment had on scientific methods of historical discourse, specifically in the works of **_Leopold von Ranke,_** whose empiricism, integration of primary source-based history, and universal history is opposite **_postmodern_** historical thinking. Historical thinkers such as *Ranke,* rejected the *teleological* approach to history and embraced human agency.  Lastly, I aim to describe the transitions into *Enlightened* thinking and how that thinking altered historical thought in the long run.

3
