## Historiography and Enlightened Thinking

### Andy Mancha

  The Enlightenment has held a crucial place in the narratives of history and methods within historiography. The social and political situations of the past led to the need for a new way of thinking with various innovative and revolutionary methods that broke from the historical traditions of past centuries. Historians of the Enlightenment have made significant contributions to Historiography and some of those methods are used or reflected today. The Age of Enlightenment generally serves as a sign of modernity and its influence has continued to play a role in historical methodology, as well as, many other disciplines and can be exhibited through the various ideologies and concepts since the 1800’s. Enlightened rationality established and developed a new, more scientific academic writing of history. This period was one of intellectual discovery as well as religious, political, and social dissent.

  The Enlightenment is considered a product of Europe that spread and became embedded in cultural traditions. Many associate the period to be of hegemonic origins from early modernity to the thoughts of Karl Marx. Standard interpretations have viewed the Enlightenment as a perpetuation of Eurocentricity, but its value of human agency counteracts that conjecture. The Renaissance and the Protestant Reformation were catalysts and pushed the philosophical and scientific emphasis on intellectual thought. This lead to a period of political, scientific, historical, and philosophical thinking that undermined the traditional, dominant authority of the monarchy and the Church and paved the way for political and social revolutions, a general “freedom of thought,” rational inquiry, critical thinking, and relative religious tolerance. Sociologist and philosopher, Max Weber described the Enlightenment as “mankind’s exit from self-incurred immaturity.” (Conrad, pg. 4) This exit from immaturity resulted in individualistic perspectives, human rights, rationalization, and the “disenchantment of the world.” (Conrad, pg. 5)

  In France, the movement helped create new conceptions about history and applied new methodological approaches. The Enlightened writer Voltaire shifted historical focus from diplomatic military events to social history and emphasizing achievements in the arts and sciences. (Popkin, 225) He, as well as other, focused less on large-scale events and more on culture and small groups. During the Renaissance history was considered history as artistic expression versus history as empirical science during the Enlightenment; following the humanist tradition of the Enlightenment. (Leffler, pg. 4) History was previously a branch of moral philosophy and many intellectuals viewed good history as such that should focus on unchanging perceptions or virtue and vice.  History was both a function and tool to record the “great” deeds of the past, but limited their vision to political and military events and the chronological organization. (Leffler, pg. 5) Previous historians sought to amuse and instruct the audience and to break the tedious chronology, historians previously used speeches and flamboyant orations. (Leffler, pg. 5) That same historical writing was religiously centered and enlightened thinking was more “secular” in their orientation than their medieval forbearers, who introduced events by reference to omens. (Leffler, pg. 6) Often, uncontrollable forces shaped man’s destiny. The “Enlightenment” can be used both to designate a particular historical period and refers to a process or the pursuit of modernity. (Schmidt, pg. 3) The period was chiefly concerned with human society and the physical and moral well-being of individuals. (Schmidt, pg. 6) This required the exclusion of other traditional lines of thought.

  Enlightened thinkers in Britain, in France and throughout Europe embraced the notion that humanity could be improved through rational change through a production of books, essays, inventions, scientific discoveries, laws, wars, and revolutions. American and French Revolutions were directly inspired by Enlightenment ideals and marked the peak of its influence, as well as, defining the beginning of its decline. (Sonenscher, pg. 12) Education and history are ongoing processes that never cease to hold significance, because humanity places a major emphasis on knowing about and attempting to understand the world around them. Historians have used the Enlightenment as an opportunity to study the transmission of ideas; perpetuation interest in historiography itself. This train of ideas encompassed analysis of how ideas were transmitted. (Burnson, pg. 10) The more-literate public and the widespread availability of printed material assisted in the spread of ideas with speed and accuracy. This was due to the invention of the printing press by Johannes Gutenberg in 1460 and eventually led to a major change in the way texts circulated and expanded access of historical material to the mases. (Popkin, pg. 55)

  Various historical events and evolved notions led to, and impacted the Age of Enlightenment, which in turn changed historiographical concepts and is still present and relevant today. Renaissance Humanism was the system of thought that attached importance of knowledge to humans, rather than divine or supernatural matters, which became the dominate framework of writing and interpreting historical info during the Early Modern Era. (Popkin, pg. 49-50) The Protestant Reformation divided Europeans in a social and educational context. (Popkin, 52-53) The critical methods of historical writing and the rejection of authority for the bible foreshadowed the major intellectual movement of the 18th century. (Popkin, pg. 60) The Enlightenment also created a “quarrel of the ancient and the moderns,” in that previous historians thought that antiquity was the pinnacle of human achievement, but Enlightened thinkers felt new and progressive history could produce history that was equally as masterful. (Popkin, pg. 60)

  Also known as the Age of Reason, the Enlightenment developed a unique theory of practice. The practice relied on the inductive method and generally practitioners believed that technological advancement and the advancement of civilization ran parallel to each other. Enlightened historians also redefined the concept of linear time. Sociology formulated models or types and general patterns of social events, whereas history aims at the causal analysis and causal attribution of individual actions, structures, and personalities that have cultural significance. This is a reflection within the Marxist notion of teleological construction of linear narrative about the past leading up to a pre-defined and end point or goal. (Green and Troup, pg. 37) From the Enlightenment, Marxist theory evoked more insight into social history, rather than strictly the history of the elite, such as royalty, military leaders, or the clergy. The application of the scientific method to history was crucial during this period. Voltaire believed history was a means to study the mistakes of the past to advance progress and that it was a battle between truth and error. (Conrad, pg. 12)

  The thinking of the Enlightenment led to many other evolved and revolutionary methods and technique within the historical profession. Scientific empiricism, coined by Francis Bacon, and eventually furthered and emphasized by Leopold von Ranke was a method that radically broke from traditional historiographical methods. Leopold von Ranke did not focus on the interactivity of society and combined pre-existing historical methods with four main principles of scientific historiography such as objectivity of historical truth, the priority of facts over concepts, the uniqueness of all historical periods, and the centrality of politics within history. (Gil, 384-385) Ranke also valued the scientific approach and new methods of historical research, including and firmly establishing the importance of use of original documents and the objective reporting of the information provided. (Popkin, pg. 77) The Humanism movement of the 19th century emphasized the value of human agency, individually and collectively, as well as, rationalism and empiricism over superstition or dogma. These non-religious movements aligned with secularism. The concept of human agency continued to develop in the next two centuries, which focused on the basis aspects of human existence and foundation for ethics and society is autonomy and moral equality. (Coleman, pg. 4) Stemming from the concepts of human agency and empiricism, innovation within the Annales School, sought to obtain a histoire totale, which consisted of many fields of study and more subjects and overarching connections. (Green and Troup, pg. 40) Conceptual and institutional founders Lucien Febvre incorporated a breakdown of human sciences within history and rejected emphasis of history merely upon diplomatic and political topics. (Green and Troup, pg 87-109) The concept of progress and the expanded definition of linear time followed in the wake of the scientific method and was a reflection of the Enlightenment values, rather than a true attempt to attain historical awareness. Failure of these theories is overshadowed by the success of empiricism, which is responsible for rebuking this mindset and laying the foundation for future “advancement” in Historiography. The Enlightenment was more than a movement or designated moment in time, such as a century or an epoch, but a continued emergence and solidification of modern values and a social history of ideas. 

  The Enlightenment assisted solidified the importance of knowledge within the public sphere, with the development of a new set of institutions such as the coffee house, the salon, Masonic Lodge, and a greater learned society. Topics of reason, democracy, racial equality, feminism, religious toleration, sexual emancipation, and freedom of expression were shared in these places of educational discourse. (Taylor, pg. 15) Intellectual coherence of the Enlightenment may be found in the commitment to understanding and advancing the causes and conditions of human betterment in this world. The contribution to the modern world and historiography on the modern world may be judged on the intellectual importance of the societies it observed on the clarity of its recommendations for the improvement of the human conditions as it found it. 

  The Age of Enlightenment shifted central topics within history, as well as, the methods in which to discuss those topics. Although, postmodernism and contemporary historical methods are vastly different from this period, the idea that history should not only center on solely the members of the elite remains fervent and active. Also, empiricism and objectivity remain a contested, yet staple aspect of historiography. 

