## **Medieval Islamic Historiography**
### by Eden Vigil 

Middle Eastern history has been primarily Islamic, rooted in faith, and often begins with the Islamic creation of Adam. From the advent of Islam, or the golden ages of Islam after the 7th century, history was told orally, like a story. As such, it included stories within the narrative which were "used to help the listener/reader frame the historical narrative that he/she was about hear/read" (Keshk, p. 382). It helps "frame" the narrative which is done in three different ways. The first requires familiarity; "the...story follow[s] a certain pattern than the listener/reader is familiar with." The second way "is to use the set-up story as a moral micro-narrative of what is about to occur." It then acts like a frame for the narrative. Finally, the third way to "set-up" the story is as a lead-in; "that is, the narrator would like the listener/reader to understand the protocols of certain actions" (Keshk, p. 382). These frames for Islamic history, specifically, posed as a way to illuminate the things unique to it. 

Middle Eastern historiography is often not included in the traditional historiographical narrative. As we have read, there have been numerous European historiographers, and this section hopes to include a medieval Middle Eastern perspective. I am going to focus on **three** historians and their methods of writing history: al-Ṭabarī, ibn al-Athīr, and ibn Khaldūn from the 10th-14th century of the Common Era. These three Islamic historians are often **overlooked and unrepresented** in the historiographical narrative, yet they all offered unique contributions to the way medieval Middle Eastern history is understood today. These historians' works were both foundational, but also exceptional, within the writing of history. 

The first Islamic historian that will be examinated today is Abū Jaʿfar Muḥammad ibn Jarīr al-Ṭabarī (839-923 C.E.). He was a Persian Islamic scholar. His major historical work *The History of Prophets and Kings* was the first Islamic historical work of its kind (Osman, p. 66). al-Ṭabarī utilized different sources in his recounting of history, he included "a basic chronological framework and an outline of the main events... that were matters of widespread and generally accepted knowledge" (Osman, p. 67). In other words, it was similar to a chronicle, with the date and the daily happenings included. 

The way al-Ṭabarī wrote has been described as "*the khabar-form*" of writing history. *Khabar* or the plural *akhbar* often is translated as modern-day news or happenings, but in this case it means individual reports (Mårtensson, p. 291). This term describes the histories written from "the eightth to the ninth centuries C.E." that is written like a narrative that has been "pieced together by individual reports about historical events, transmitted by *isnads*, or the chains of authorities..." (Mårtensson, p. 291). **Within this narrative**, the information he was received by the *isnads* is then presented, given variants to them, then evaluated with "his main criteria of evaluation being soundness of the *isnad*, and reference to God and His Messenger" (Mårtensson, p. 292). 

Within his transmission of the information from the *isnads*, al-Ṭabarī often "interjects and inserts general information that was presumably circulating at the time, sometimes introducing it with the words, "*qala Abu Gafar*," thus creating "a basic chronological framework and an outline of the main events... that were matters of widespread and generally accepted knowledge."" (Osman, p. 67). However, al-Ṭabarī has also been accused of manipulating the sources in order to fit his narrative. For example, "al-Ṭabarī added material to his sources to develop the characters of his heroes and villains. In others, he omitted details to render characters who were not central to his theme more opaque." (Judd, p. 210). al-Ṭabarī also "recorded...different versions that sometimes confirmed and sometimes contradicted each other" (Gabrieli, p. 86). The utilization of  "*the khabar-form*" to create a thematic narrative to explain events was not limited to just al-Ṭabarī. His historical successors also utilized narrative, and his legacy lived on through ibn al-Athīr. 

Historian during the 12th and 13th centuries and chronicler of counter-crusader Salah ad-Din, ʿIzz al-Dīn Abū al-ḤasanʿAlī ibn al-Athīr wrote an entire world history called *Al-Kamil fi al-Tariq* or *The Complete History*. This history also began with the Islamic creation of Adam to time contemporary for the author, ibn al-Athīr. Born in Mosul in May 1160, ibn al-Athīr was in the city when Salah ad-Din besieged the town in 1185 (Mallett, p. 243). His methods included the application of a title and placing events in chronological order (Kamaruzaman et. al, p. 32). While this was not unique to ibn al-Athīr, it helped the work remain organized. There truly are not enough articles about al-Athīr and very few translations of the work *The Complete History*, but his contributions to history cannot be downplayed. 

Ibn al-Athīr's work in *The Complete History* includes an introduction, or *Muqaddimah* in Arabic. This introduction includes "his philosophy of history for collective understanding of the readers" (Kamaruzaman et. al, p. 29). His work was not purely a "historical" artifact but instead served multiple purposes; his history was intended to be a reminder to mankind, or *tazkirah*. (Kamaruzaman et. al, p. 32). While his work was revolved around the Crusades and the European Crusaders, the history he wrote was not limited to just his personal experience; he "did not limit his attention to events that involved them; he had wider horizons [and included] North African history...as well as accounts of events in Central Asia and Iran" (Hillenbrand, p.712). His historical analysis has been vital to the understanding of the Crusades and his life's work *The Complete History* has been utilized as a reminder of his philosophical views of historical collectivism. 

Abū Zayd 'Abd ar-Raḥmān ibn Muḥammad ibn Khaldūn al-Ḥaḍramī (or better known as ibn Khaldūn) was born in 1332 C.E. in Tunisia. His work the *The Muqaddimah* which is the first volume, and introduction to, his world history "*the Kitab al-'lbar*" or *Book of Historical Examples* (Gabrieli, p. 93). He was trained in philosophy and often wrote "some summaries of the works of great Muslim philosophers", but never called himself a philosopher (Çasku, p. 27). In fact, Ibn Khauldun "did not only criticize philosophy but also refuted it and condemned those who taught the subject" (Ahmad, p. 58). He was never in the "circle" of Muslim philosophy, nor was *The  Muqaddima* a strictly philosophical introduction to history; however, his introduction holds both Greek and annaliste styles of writing (Ahmad, p. 57, 58). *The Muqaddima* is "a general review of the arts, science, and industry of Islamic civilization" which is the predecessor to the history of the people "with ethical and cultural stratification" (Gabrieli, p. 93). Within *The Muqaddima*, ibn Khaldūn creates the concept of *'aṣabiyyah* in comparison to civilization. 

His main theme within *The Muqaddima* is the concept of *'aṣabiyyah* or group feeling; civilization, however, "is the matter of the state, and equally the state provides matter for civilization" which is the **potential** *material cause of history* (Çasku, p. 34). ‘Aṣabiyyah is the "family or group feeling, whose intensity varies with environment." (Dale, p. 438). It replaces one's "destructive tribal and kinship ties" (White, p. 236). However, just as relationships end or family members pass away, ‘aṣabiyyah naturally has an end. Like the end of dynasty, the civilization passes away as well. It seems this change is done without human agency because "[the] kingship arises because of the "*necessity of existence*, [or] *darufra al-wujud*"; so just as civilizations form with ‘aṣabiyyah, kingships form because of "the necessity [their] existence" (Dale, p. 438). The theory of "causation" or historical causality is present within his works, utilizing rationality and logic. This is why he has been called the last Greek and first Annaliste Historian. 

He has been called "the last Greek and the first Annaliste Historian" because of this large introduction, in which he "used the...assumptions of this rationalist tradition" (Dale, p. 431). The way in which this was implemented within *The Muqaddimah* was by Khaldūn simply stating that "history is--or should be--rooted in wisdom or philosophy" and that the past must be analyzed, rather than reported. This was to be done "rationally... using Greco-Islamic logical methodologies." (Dale, p. 433). The introduction alone contains his "philosophic ideas, with regareds to human society, history and civilization", so it has been recognized as Ibn Khaldūn's "thoughts on philosophy of history, historiography and sociology" (Ahmad, p. 58). As stated earlier, the philosophy of history is deeply embedded in civilization, and therefore ‘aṣabiyyah is deeply embedded within Khaldūn's philosophy. 

These three Islamic historians were huge testaments of their time and their environment. Remarkably, their works have lasted to this day. The historical significance of their works are not limited to just the frames in which they worked, but the way they were written. al-Ṭabarī's manipulation of his sources to fit the particular narrative he wanted to tell is a neverceasing fact within the history of writing history. This was not a new phenomena; what is new is the utilization of a thematic narrative in which *all three* of these authors encompass. This is the brilliance of their contributions to Middle Eastern history; the historical works of al-Ṭabarī and ibn al-Athīr both formed a narrative approach to Islamic history. These frames created by the three authors here remain an example, and even a reminder (tazkirah) to learn from in our future historical endeavors. 







