Elena Farmin

**The Intellectual Status of History**

In his 1891 essay “The Significance of History,” Frederick Jackson Turner wrote “The conceptions of history have been almost as numerous as the men who have written history” (Stern, p. 198). Not only do individual historians and schools of thought have their own views on the proper methods and purpose of history, but so do time periods. Being a field of study that has existed for thousands of years, history has evolved not just in terms of how it is conducted but in its intellectual status. For all eras prior to the nineteenth century, history, while a well-studied subject, was not an academic discipline in its own right. From the nineteenth century through the present day, history continued to experience massive paradigm shifts that determined the subject’s relevance not just in academia but in society. 

The Ancient Greek historian Herodotus owes his moniker of “the father of history” to the “proto-history” of ancient Egyptian and Babylonia record keepers. Herodotus praised the Egyptians in *Histories* for “by their practice of keeping records of the past, [they] have made themselves much the most learned of any nation of which I have had experience” (Burrow, p. 3). In that same work, which comes from the Ancient Greek word for inquiry (historia), Herodotus states that his purpose in writing was “so that human achievements may not become forgotten in time, and great and [marvelous] deeds … may not be without their glory …” (Burrow, p. 13). Both Herodotus and his successor Thucydides saw their work as a means of preserving memory of the past without the fantastical elements of poetic narratives (notably the gods and monsters seen in the epics of Homer) (Popkin, p. 27). In other words, these two emblems of Ancient Greek historiography made narrative pasts more grounded and human. About a century later, Polybius in the Roman World, followed by (notably) Livy and Tacitus, would continue this tradition but with a wider scope. Focusing on past events that occurred beyond the confines of a city or city-state, Ancient Roman historians developed what is know today as a national history (Popkin, p. 31-32). While the writings of these scholars are now seen as the commencement of a particular field, the scholars themselves were just putting a new spin on the philosophical tradition of preserving the past.

With a new world religion came another intellectual innovation. By the fourth century, the Roman Empire had been Christianized, along with the “barbarian” peoples in the centuries to follow. While the scholars of the former Roman and Hellenistic Worlds viewed historical writings as the continuation of a philosophical tradition, medieval Christian historians used their works to promote a theological tradition. Medieval Christian historiography propagated the theological idea of God’s divine plan, that all events in human history were leading up to some great event (Popkin, 36-39). Another major characteristic of Western medieval historical writing was the shift from narrative to chronicles and annals. That is not to say that all writings were done in that style, but it was a sign of the loss of ancient knowledge and unity as a result of the “disintegration of the western Roman Empire” (Popkin, p. 39-41) …

More shifts were to come in the early modern era, two time periods that are known today as the Renaissance and the Enlightenment. The new historical traditions developed during these nearly four centuries came about thanks to “the secularization of thought, the growth of science, and the questioning of all systems embodying eternal truths” (Stern, p. 12). Renaissance historiography held the Ancient World in such high regard, while Enlightenment historiography welcomed the possibilities of the future. The invention of the printing press allowed for the expansion of “access to historical knowledge,” which had previously been available to only the elite and the clergy (Popkin, p. 53-54). (Theatre and history) (Notable Enlightenment historians such as Voltaire and Edward Gibbon)

(Professionalization in the nineteenth century, thank you Leopold Ranke) (History was finally an academic discipline in its own right)

(Twentieth and twenty-first centuries saw enough paradigm shifts to make one’s head spin) (Narratives of people who are not just white, male, heterosexual, western, etc.) (Popularization of history: historical knowledge became even more readily available to the general public through museums, libraries, national archives, film, popular books, and television documentaries. History was no longer a pursuit of scholars but something that ordinary people could engage in, whether through debate or study).

Conclusion …
