## Early Feminist History and Changes within Historiography 
### First Draft
After World War II, a phenomenon called postmodernism developed, and would soon sweep through the field of historiography. Postmodernism, a move away from the Rankean traditions of the first half of the 20th century, rejected most of the changes to historiography that had come about with the Enlightenment. With this, avenues that had been previously closed now had the ability to make their debut. Along with other histories, women’s history would emerge alongside second wave feminism. Women were “trapped in a present where oppressive social relations appear natural and inevitable. Knowledge of history is knowledge that things have changed and do change” (Green and Troup, pg. 253). While women’s history would arise because of women questioning why their story had been left out of the narrative, it would grow to become an all-encompassing social movement that would look at the larger social relations between men and women. With this change would come a change within historiography. Using the pathways carved out by postmodernism, second-wave feminism would fundamentally change historiography through bringing to light the many male-centric ways that the world was classified through, as well as questioning the traditional ways of thinking about the world. 

Throughout much of history, women were left out of the narrative. In an increasingly postmodernist fashion, historians began to question the relation of women and history. In historiography, women were constantly judged on the same measure as men. Instead of looking at the value of the roles that women played in history, historians often would compare their professions (i.e. homemaker, mother, queen) against the traditional male professions (i.e. king, scientist, banker, lawyer). In Simone de Beauvoir’s groundbreaking essay about the treatment of women throughout history, she states that “[h]umanity is male, and man defines woman, not in herself, but in relation to himself” (Beauvoir, pg. 26). So, while historiography had continued to grow and change, the fundamental thing that stayed the same was the way that historians (at this point, they were mostly male) viewed women. Without questioning their positionality, historians wrote about the role of women in society as a fixed entity, instead of a constantly changing body. The women who were wrote about generally had some characteristic or occupation that was similar to that of a man. Up until second-wave feminism, the categorization of history was generally made up of areas traditionally controlled by males. This lack of female oriented histories made it incredibly difficult to change the status of women throughout history, as it was only being looked at through a male lens. Feminist historians would seek out a larger change to the institutions that perpetuated the unchanging view of women in history: historiography.  

When looking at the periodization of history, and as such, the changes in historiography throughout history, most conformed to the male dominated view of history. Looking at history through this lens is what continually reinforced the traditional view of women. “Historians could not lay claim to special knowledge about the ‘natural” roles and relation of the sexes, but they knew what that order was, or ought to be. History simply tended to confirm it,” (Kelly, pg. 7). This was one of the fundamental ways that the female historians would go on to change historiography. Recognizing that most categories were created for and by men, women could then go forward and illustrate that the gender roles that had seemed so “natural” to most historians were actually “a social and not a natural one. This perception forms the core idea that upsets traditional thinking” (Kelly, pg. 1). This would be one of the major turning points for historiography as a whole. The relationships between the sexes, as well as the relationships between the majority and the minority, would be forever changed because of the push into postmodernism by feminist historians. Postmodern historiography would begin to question the traditional categories of analysis that had been created by the historiographic revolution during the Enlightenment. Questioning the positionality of those who created the categories, as well as the periodization of history, would leave the pathway open for other people groups to be included in the narrative. One of Kelly’s seminal theories was that surrounding a female renaissance. Kelly stated that the major moments in history for men were not necessarily the same for women, sometimes “events that further the historical development of men, liberating them from natural, social, or ideological constraints, have quite different, even opposite, effects upon women,” (Kelly, pg. 19). This is one of the flaws with a male centered history, and something that feminist historians tried to change within historiography. Through their striving they were able to push the narrative off center and open the floodgates for other marginalized groups in society. 

Feminist historians would contribute a significant amount to the push towards postmodernism. By exposing the problematic ways in which historiography had been previously practiced, as well as fundamentally shifting away from the singular perspective of the white male, historiography was pushed into a new era. These changes were monumental, and pushed for other groups to finally be included in the grand narrative, but second-wave feminism had its problems. While this was the first step towards a more all-inclusive history, there was almost no mention of women of color. White, middle-class, women led the charge, but they seemed to only take their issues into account. In the later 1980’s, this would profoundly change with the development of third-wave feminism. Women of color, of different socio-economic backgrounds, and of differing identities would begin to push for another change in historiography, creating an entirely new tidal wave of change. 
