
Before one can hope to dive into a collection of historiographic paradigms and frameworks in history, one must first try and understand ‘what is historiography?’ In layman’s terms, historiography is the ‘history of history’. Its study is far more than chronology, reaching beyond the tabling of dates and events. Historiography delves into the intricacies that culminate in the historical record. The simple student demands ‘facts’ and ‘truth’ in their history, while the wiser questions the authenticity of facts in and of themselves, while understanding truth to be an elusive concept. It is the interpretations of dates, statistics, and events that create history and turn a simple historical record into historiography. Such interpretation is created with a narrative in mind, writing a story to convey a message, whether that be an explanation of past events or guidance for future actors. The very essence of history – the narrative – also exists as the bane of its existence. Without narrative and interpretation, one merely has a conglomerate of numbers, assembled without purpose or clarity, while imposing narrative opens the historian to a myriad of flaws, including bias, omission, and assumption. It is with understanding of this dichotomy that historians must work to produce the ‘best’ and ‘most-balanced’ history possible, an imperfect task whose results can never satisfy all.


The notion of absolute fact is a dangerous concept. To believe in the existence of ultimate truth precludes oneself from critical thought and therefore limits the mind. To be overly skeptical renders oneself incapable of building complex notions of the world, for lack of foundational reason to work off of. The most dangerous histories are those which are believed wholly and without hesitation. That is not to say one should not accept certain narratives as fundamentally true or as reasonable explanations. Rather, one should approach history as inherently political, in existence because an individual or group sought to record an event or events as they perceived it to have happened. Learning history should not be viewed as a mission to find the ‘truth’, but rather as an exercise in analyzing perspectives – available data, narratives, prior works, and contemporary outlooks – and creating plausible interpretation.


Critical thought exists as the truest and most reliable approach to history. As a policy decision, institutions of education should address the duplicity of historiography, and do so from a young age. Simply advocating for a degree of skepticism will go a long way in prompting new generations of historians to question the narrative which their culture embraces. While the interpretation of one’s society may be foundationally truthful, and is most certainly most cohesive with the narrative it wishes to embrace, encouraging historical skepticism can do much to remedy extremism and other ‘isms’ caused by other ‘isms’, such as nationalism or Marxism. There is much to be said for the benefits of national unity and historical idols from whom followers can gain inspiration. However, there is just as much to be said about blind patriotism and demagoguery. For what do we lose, other than our bias, when learning another’s perspective? All aspects of narrative – its necessity and shortcomings – would be shown to be true through the effective, critical study of history.


The intent of this collection is modest but relevant to students of history. Through the dissection of historiography, our team has compiled a series of topics and paradigms in which one should analyze history. These themes are either central to the study of historiography and would be remiss without them, or cover areas believed to be lacking in the academic field and are sorely needed for its improvement. While some areas of examination are traditional and expected to be included in a compilation of historiographical insight, other areas are commonly overlooked or neglected by academics. Each writer brings their field of expertise and passion to their section, ensuring thoughtfulness and diligence. By collaborating with more than a dozen students of history, each with their own perspectives and focuses of study, this work acts as a uniquely specialized compilation of historiographical themes that span the breadth of human civilization.


There are certain topics that simply cannot be overlooked in a text of history’s history. Among the more traditional is ancient historians and the methodology of some of civilization’s earliest historiography. In a classic sense, our scholar dives into a time before history had any academic inclination; when history truly was limited to myth, and its purpose was to explain the world in even the most magical sense. ‘Fathers of history’, such as Herodotus and Thucydides, launched western historiography on a path of progression. In the same vein of ancient western historians, the Romans followed many trends of their Greek predecessors. This relationship between two ancient worlds, and the legacy of their scholarship, sets a standard for historical writing that continues long after their empires fade from power. To the detriment of historiography, many texts before this focus almost exclusively on the centrist – or western – perspective. If one were to rely on the average history textbook alone for one’s knowledge, it could be forgiven if one had little or no understanding of histories outside of the ‘white’, European world. For this reason, corollaries have been featured, exploring the historiographical methods and works of prominent Eastern scholars – from the Near East in the Islamic Kingdoms, to the rich cultural centers of China. This addition provides insight into a world all-to-often overlooked by most mainstream historians. While much is to be said of the western world, its contributions, and the ways in which it has shaped historiography, the contributions of non-centrist cultures are equally notable and therefore worth space in our collection.


Following the themes of escaping western-centric tunnel vision, our collections dedicates scholarship to the post-colonial movement in historiography. In this analysis, it is shown how deeply embedded colonial histories are embedded within the histories of other nations; how western history permeates and often infiltrates the histories of local hosts in eastern and indigenous cultures. Thinkers like Edward Said – a father of post-colonial history – advocated for ideas of “orientalism”, whereby non-centrist histories took center-stage. Other schools of thought, like subaltern historians, led by Dipesh Chakrabarty, developed in response and became seen as more moderate in post-colonial studies. Chakrabarty and other subalterns thought it more prudent to recognize the existence of western, colonial bias, but appreciate its contributions for what they are, rather than deny their legacy, as some have accused Said and his followers. This movement of post-colonialism sparked a broader evolution into post-modern history, whereby intersectionality became of more importance to the modern scholar.


Marginalized members of society were the focus of post-modern scholarship, namely women and minorities. Our collection analyzes the controversial philosophies of Michel Foucault and his new perspectives on human sexuality; as well as women, gender, and the waves of feminism. Looking from a 21st century perspective, our scholars look at the progress that has been made in the world of feminist history, even in comparing the post-modern movement of the 1980s to now, a mere thirty years later. Historiography and gender have come a long way since academics first began framing the importance of women in history. In 1986, Joan W. Scott detailed the importance of including gender diversity in the historic record. However, in reading her once-profound perspective, any millennial academic would be remiss not to notice her binary approach to the discussion. In rethinking and rewriting gender history, the modern historian must consider the spectrum of genders in order to be best representative and most accurate.


No less important among the social histories to be covered, are those pertaining to the common laborer. Much of his work went unanswered when Karl Marx questioned the way in which society viewed its socio-economic structures. Yet, half a century later, his paradigm shift inspired many thinkers and historians – from the Annales School in France, to Chinese Revolutionaries. While historians, up until that point, had focused primarily on the ruling elite, their contributions, and the influence they had on their people, social historians sought to empower the working class and study their role in the historic record. Such a move gave way to other facets of social history which relied almost entirely on narrative, rather than ‘professionalized’ history advocated by those like Leopold von Ranke. The up-and-coming quantitative movement of historiography became central to new social histories, which often relied on statistics and numbers for analysis.


Finally, our collection provides insight into a modern lens on historiography. Contemporary politics have brought arguments of ‘fake news’ to the spotlight. This notion of fact manipulation and truth distortion is inseparable from the study of history and how it is accepted in society. Debates rage on between academics, who champion standards of verification and research, and those who believe history is more subjective than not, and therefore facts are malleable. Narrative, perhaps now more than ever, plays a key role in understanding agenda, the inclusion and omission of ‘facts’, and the audience to which something is intended. Our scholars take on the complexity of ‘History Wars’, as well as the role of film, art, and other media in the telling of history. Film, in particular, popularizes history in a divisive (and often less-than-accurate) way. Historians find themselves asking, if it is better the public know history imperfectly, or not at all? And thus, in full circle, one must revisit the goals of history and the approach best taken for understanding its purpose.
