# ***History Wars: The Battle for the Future of History***

**As history became more popular among the general public in the late 20th century, the conflict between popular history and academic history became a crucial debate for the history professionals** (Popkin, 2016, 153). Historians faced a dilemma: to write either a popular or a scholarly account of history. In essence, a work of popular history is written for the purpose of mass audiences; while academic or scholarly history is made through objective vigorous scholarly research. While historians who write popular histories are more likely to make money off their works, “popular history is often looked down upon by more academically minded historians” (Norton, 2013). **The debate between popular and scholarly history will have repercussions for the future of historical studies because, “he who controls the past controls the future. He who controls the present controls the past”** (Popkin, 2016, 113).

In the 1960s and 1970s, historians started to cash in on history’s new popularity. Historians such as Pierra Nora, Emmanuel Le Roy Ladurie and George Duby experienced successfully marketed their works to mass audiences (Popkin, 2016, 154). George Duby wrote “a century after history withdrew from the marketplace and took refuge behind the opacities of erudition, it now showed renewed interest in the literacy business and the possibility of reaching a wide audience” (Popkin, 2016, 154). The general public’s fascination with the past did not align with the academic focus of seeking the past through objectivity and strict scrutiny. However, the general public was fascinated with flash topics. For example, British “university historians” attacked the general public’s interest in the “restoration of aristocratic ‘stately homes’” because it placed an over-emphasis on the lives of the rich and powerful (Popkin, 2016, 154).

In 1994, the divide between popular and academic history was on full display in the United States when the Smithsonian attempted to bring the Enola Gay, the plane that dropped the atomic bomb on Hiroshima during World War II, to its Washington D.C. museum (Linenthal, 1996). The Enola Gay exhibit was controversial because it was seen by many Republicans and veterans groups as “anti-American” and “projecting the ‘countercultural values’ of the Vietnam era onto America’s last good war” (Linenthal, 1996, p. 2). But for academic historians like Beverley Southgate, who was not involved in the development of the Enola Gay exhibit, the agenda of all modern history should not be to promote nationalist histories but to advocate for “that international community to which now we all belong” (Southgate, 2005, 74). **In this case, not only do the believers of popular and academic history have different viewpoints but they have different values.** In 1995, the Enola Gay exhibit was later discarded by the museum in 1995. But, the idea of the exhibit itself struck at the heart of the “History Wars”, a term that drove Edward Linenthal to write the book “*History Wars: The Enola Gay and Other Battles for the American Past*” (Linenthal, 1996).

**The historical battle over the Enola Gay is not only crucial from a historical standpoint of “to show what actually happened”, as Leopold Von Ranke stated, but it has a profound impact on how America sees its national identity** (Popkin, 2016, 76). While certain examples of American popular history glorified America’s role in dropping the atomic bombs in Japan, such as its inclusion in President Truman’s Presidential Library, the consensus among academic historians is to take a more objective approach by analyzing the devastating impact the atomic bomb had on the Japanese people (The Harry S. Truman Library and Museum, 2018) (Linenthal, 1996, 131). If the historical consensus is that the United States unnecessarily dropped the atomic bombs, then the United States unjustifiably killed hundreds of thousands of civilians (Linenthal, 1996, 79). If the historical consensus is that the United States was justified in the dropping of the atomic bombs, for which certain United States government reports state that the country would have lost up to 63,000 soldiers and a popular history museum claimed up to 1 million dead, then the United States was the heroic winner of World War II (Linenthal, 1996, 54-56).

The issue of the atomic bombings on Japan is not the only controversial issue in the American History debate between popular and academic history. In the academic historian Anders Stephanson’s book, “*Manifest Destiny: American Expansionism and the Empire of Right*”, Stephanson takes a more critical viewpoint of the popular historical viewpoint that glorified America’s westward expansion (Stephanson, 1995). Native American historian, Roxanne Dunbar-Ortiz, in her book “*An Indigenous Peoples' History of the United States*”, aggressively attacks the United States for perpetuating a “genocide” against Indigenous peoples and displacing Indigenous tribes of their land (Dunbar-Ortiz, 2014). Dunbar-Ortiz advocated that the history of United States and Indigenous relations be studied through a settler-colonial approach. Differing views of how the United States has handled Indigenous relations have sparked a debate concerning how America’s views its past. **Was the United States’ expansion westward justifiable? Has the United States committed genocide against Indigenous individuals?** These questions are at the heart of the battle to define America’s past.

The rise of varying viewpoints of America’s past history has produced differing opinions of how American history should be taught in the classroom and in educational settings. Politicians have also debated on how critical the history curriculum should be of America’s past. **While “the history wars in the United States often saw academic historians defending a pluralistic approach to the past” that promoted an inclusionary mindset for different social groups, conservative politicians often thought that academic historians were seeking to promote “politically correctness”** (Popkin, 2016, 159). A “pluralistic approach” to history emphasized feminist history, non-western history and other important social histories (Popkin, 2016, 159). However, not all academic historians believe that a heavy emphasis on plurality is good for historical studies. Mark Lilla, a historian at Columbia University, attacked the growing trend of identity politics in history by stating that “the achievements of women’s rights movements, for instance, were real and important, but you cannot understand them if you do not first understand the founding fathers’ achievement in establishing a system of government based on the guarantee of rights” (Lilla, 2016). The battle for control of America’s past not only transcends the distinctions between popular and academic history but it is impacted by the political debate of what should be included in history curriculums across the country.

**The frequent lack of separation between popular history and myths has been criticized by academic historians.** In McNeill’s journal article, “*Mythistory, or Truth, Myth, History, and Historians*”, he attacks national histories for promoting myths that objective historians have to dismantle (McNeill, 1986). In Southgate’s book “What is History for?”, he claims that one of history’s primary purposes is to break myths (Southgate, 2005, location 947). Southgate claims that “for historians, history is the very antithesis of myth; it’s precisely what myth isn’t it – namely true” (Southgate, 2005, location, 947). During Hitler’s reign in Germany, he promoted a nationalist history of Germany that “united” the Germany people (Southgate, 2005, location 1503). This false “Nazi propaganda” popularized the notion that “Germanic superiority could be traced right back to the earliest times; and the retention of that superiority depended on the maintenance of racial purity” (Southgate, 2005, location 1517). German nationalist historians spread the false notion that the Jews were responsible for “spreading the bubonic plague” and hindering the economic capabilities of lower income individuals (Southgate, 2005, location 1517). Hitler used these false historical viewpoints to gain support for his attempts at conquest and empire during World War II. Hitler’s nationalist history case study is a perfect example of why we need objective historians that are able to bring a scholarly perspective of the past.

Even though popular history has its faults in its lack of emphasis on objectivity and vigorous research, it provides a valuable benefit to society. **An academic historian, David Lowenthal, expressed his support for popular history, specifically “Disneyland’s talking Abraham Lincoln”, who stated that “better a misinformed enjoyment of history than none, a lighthearted dalliance with the past than a wholesale rejection of it”** (Popkin, 2016, 155). Lowenthal is correct in his assessment of popular history because it is beneficial for the history profession to have a greater audience. While Disneyland’s interpretation of Abraham Lincoln may not be the most critical or in-depth viewpoint, it gives the general public a broad understanding of one of America’s most important presidents and historical figures. Dangerous aggressive national narratives, like the one promoted by Hitler’s Germany, should be quickly identified and combatted for the betterment of the world. However, the history profession should not loose potential consumers because an intellectual elite is upset that a “lighthearted” historical representation is not scholarly enough (Popkin, 2016, 155). In “*What is History For?*”, Southgate claims that all history has an agenda and it is unreasonable for a historian to be completely objective and to “consider all angles” (Southgate, 2005, location 356 & 648). If scholarly historians even admit to academic history’s shortcomings, are scholarly historians being unfair in their criticism of popular history?

In the 21st century, the surge in the popularity of social media has had a large impact on the study of history (Haydn, 2017). Historical facts can be ascertained by the click of the button. Not only can history be studied through different mechanisms, the amount of people who can spread and share popular media has dramatically increased. When coupled with the postmodern movement of the late 20th century that challenged academia’s role in presenting history, these trends will have unforeseeable consequences on the “History Wars” (Foucault, 1989) (Popkin, 2016, 138). Will non-historians promote popular history through social media? In the aftermath of the 2016 Presidential election, the term “fake news” has been used to describe false news stories (Larderi, 2017). The issue of “Fake news” has raised questions about the reliability of easily available information. **Will social media be used to spread false historical narratives in a manner similar to “fake news” in politics?**

The future of the “History Wars” is one of the most crucial topics for the history profession because it is deeply intertwined with other key historical trends and themes (Popkin, 2016, 153). **The concept of “History Wars” expands beyond just distinctions between popular and academic history and which of those historical method will become more commonly used by future historians.** Will such subjects as Marxist history, objective history, feminist histories, nationalist history and historical sociology become more commonly used in academic curriculums? Will certain historical methods be taught with greater emphasis than others in history departments across the globe? Historians have to decide if they are going to compose their historical work for mass audiences with less of an emphasis on objectivity or if that work is to be constructed for scholarly purposes. “History Wars” have academic, political and social ramifications on how the public views the past and more importantly which historical narratives will prevail in the future.

Sources:

Greenberg, Douglas. 1998. “`History Is a Luxury’: Mrs. Thatcher, Mr. Disney, and (Public) History.” Reviews in American History 26 (1): 294.

Gast, John. 1873. “American Progress.” Still image. Library of Congress. 1873. //www.loc.gov/pictures/resource/ppmsca.09855.

Dunbar-Ortiz, Roxanne. 2014. An Indigenous Peoples’ History of the United States. ReVisioning American History. Boston : Beacon Press, [2014].

Gage, Beverly. 2017. “An Intellectual Historian Argues His Case Against Identity Politics.” The New York Times, sec. Book Review. April 17, 2018. https://www.nytimes.com/2017/08/15/books/review/mark-lilla-the-once-and-future-liberal.html.

Popkin, Jeremy D. 2016. From Herodotus to H-Net : The Story of Historiography. New York ; Oxford : Oxford University Press, [2016].

Linenthal, Edward, and Tom Engelhardt, eds. 1996. History Wars : The Enola Gay and Other Battles for the American Past. 1st ed. New York: Metropolitan Books. https://eds.b.ebscohost.com/eds/detail/detail?vid=1&sid=a41a50f4-3d27-402e-ad4f-c4935fe977c6%40sessionmgr120&bdata=JnNpdGU9ZWRzLWxpdmUmc2NvcGU9c2l0ZQ%3d%3d#AN=unm.34077658&db=cat05987a.

Guyver, Robert, and Tony Taylor. 2012. History Wars and the Classroom : Global Perspectives. Charlotte, North Carolina: Information Age Publishing. https://eds-a-ebscohost-com.libproxy.unm.edu/eds/detail/detail?nobk=y&vid=4&sid=025c5d45-cf04-40a7-9977-4ec800f8ab8f@sessionmgr4007&bdata=JnNpdGU9ZWRzLWxpdmUmc2NvcGU9c2l0ZQ==#AN=469959&db=nlebk.

Hogeland, William. 2009. Inventing American History. Boston Review Bks. Cambridge : MIT Press, 2009. http://libproxy.unm.edu/login?url=https://search.ebscohost.com/login.aspx?direct=true&db=cat06111a&AN=unm.EBC3339015&site=eds-live&scope=site.

Stephanson, Anders. 1995. Manifest Destiny : American Expansionism and the Empire of Right. [A Critical Issue]. New York : Hill and Wang, 1995.

McNeill, William H. 1986. “Mythistory, or Truth, Myth, History, and Historians.” The American Historical Review 91 (1): 1–10. https://doi.org/10.2307/1867232.

Munslow, Alun. 2007. Narrative and History. Theory and History. Basingstoke : Palgrave Macmillan, 2007.

The Harry S. Truman Library and Museum. n.d. “Presidential Years: Decision to Drop the Bomb.” Presidential Library’s Website. Truman Library. Accessed April 18, 2018. https://www.trumanlibrary.org/hst/d.htm.

Strauss, Gerald. 1991. “The Dilemma of Popular History.” Past & Present, no. 132: 130–49.

Lowenthal, David. 1985. The Past Is a Foreign Country. Cambridge [Cambridgeshire] ; New York : Cambridge University Press, 1985.

Engels, Karen. 2017. “The Story of Us.” Educational Leadership 75 (3): 38–42.

Southgate, Beverley. 2005. What Is History For? 1st ed. London and New York: Routledge.

Casey, John. 2000. “Why, 60 Years on, Zeros Are Bombing Pearl Harbour Again; As Disney Recreates the Infamous Raid by the Japanese for a Film Dubbed ‘the New Titanic’, One Leading Academic Attacks Hollywood’s Treatment of History.” Mail on Sunday (London, England), 2000, Solo Syndication edition.

Norton, Elizabeth. 2013. “Writing Popular History: Comfortable, Unchallenging Nostalgia-Fodder?” College Source. History Matters. History Brought Alive by the University of Sheffield. August 28, 2013. www.historymatters.group.shef.ac.uk/popular-vs-academic-history/.

Lilla, Mark. 2016. “The End of Identity Liberalism.” The New York Times. Sunday Review: Opinion. April 18, 2018. https://www.nytimes.com/2016/11/20/opinion/sunday/the-end-of-identity-liberalism.html

Haydn, Terry. 2017. “The Impact of Social Media on History Education: A View from England.” Yesterday and Today, no. 17 (July): 23–37.

Foucault, Michel. 1989. The Archeology of Knowledge. London: Routledge.

Malik, Kenan. 2018. “Fake News Has a Long History. Beware the State Being Keeper of ‘the Truth’ | Kenan Malik.” The Guardian. April 22, 2018. http://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2018/feb/11/fake-news-long-history-beware-state-involvement.

Lardieri, Alexa. 2017. “Fake News, Real Impact.” US News & World Report. April 22, 2018.  https://www.usnews.com/news/national-news/articles/2017-09-20/team-lewis-study-examines-how-fake-news-impacts-public.
