### Marxism and its Influence
Jerome T. Mondragon

After the Age of Reason had just appeared in Europe, the Western world was now entering a new age of industrialization. It was during the 1800 that the mechanized industry took off in the Western world. Old methods of industry were being replaced with the mass production of goods, a growing economy, and the creation of a new capitalist market. The unfortunate consequence with the rise of industry came the division of classes: the worker and the employee. The only people who benefited from this industry were those who profited, i.e the employer (Marx and Engles, 13). Thus, Marxist movement emerged during this time as a means to assisted the disadvantaged worker (Marx and Engles, 20). This movement couldn't have materialized at any other time period. For the Marxist movement to be truly successful, it need a combination of factors including industrialization, a clear dominant and subordinate social class, the country in which events occur, and the specific actions to initiate social change. 

To understand the movement, it's important to understand its creator. The most important figure of the movement is of course Karl Marx. The entire movement is named after him. Without him, there wouldn't be a movement! He and his confidant, Frederick Engles, formulated the commanding literature on the subject, _Communist Manifesto_, Devised in the Fall of 1848, the pamphlet was a theoretical and practical program for the emerging Communist Party. Its target audience was the working class. Its purpose was to reflect,"...the history of the modern working class." The ultimate goal of the working class was to shift the balance of power in their favor by gaining control of the economic and political systems (Marx and Engles, 30). 

How can this be accomplished? Mark and Engles created a thorough outline to initiate this process. First is industrialization i.e. capitalism; which is established by mass production and profit for the employer (Marx and Engles, 16) Second, is class distinction. The working class must become of their class and dire situation (Marx and Engels, 6) B.B. Kendrick admits that, "...no proposition is more susceptible of historical truth than that there is a tendency for various economic groups to become aware of their class interests and to work consciously for the fulfillment of ends which they consider good (Marx and Engles, 27)." How are the masses supposed to be enlightened? (Marx and Engles, 5)  This must be done by a charismatic leader or individual. In the _What is to be Done?_ by Vladimir Lenin also mentions that the, "role of vanguard can be fulfilled only by a party that is guided by an advanced theory (Lenin, 28). Written in 1901, Lenin took the advice of Marx yet implemented his own plan in Russia to overthrow the monarchy (Lenin, 36-30). Thus, Lenin was the individual to lead Russia in a bloody revolt against the aristocrats. Through his intelligence, captivating speeches and charming character, Lenin was able "emancipation of the workers" and abolition of old systems as the Manifesto had decreed. (Marx and Engles 6, 20).

Social differences throughout history are nothing new. Marx and Engles admitted since the Roman Empire up into the medieval period, there has always been a class that has been subservient to another (Marx and Engles, 9). What is important, however, was the introduction of the ___Industrial Revolution___. E.P. Thompson similarly mentions in _Exploitation_, "The physical instruments of production were seen as giving rise in a direct and more-or-less compulsive way to new social relationships, institutions, and cultural modes." (Thompson p. 46) Marx mentions that, "Modern industry has converted the little workshop of the patriarchal master into the great factory of the industrial capitalists." (Marx and Engles, 16) Finally, Marx describes, "...steam and machinery revolutionized industrial production. The place of manufacture was taken by the giant, modern industry, the place of the industrial middle class, by industrial millionaires-the leaders of whole industrial armies, the modern ___bourgeois___. (Marx and Engles, 10)" Thus emerged the dominant class! They are sole reason why such a system exists. 

If there is always a wealthy and dominant social class, there must always be subservient class to work the machines and factories. This class was dubbed the ___proletarians___. E.P. Thompson describes the uneasy relationship between the employee and employer. Employers are rulers of their enterprise because they profit from workers' labor, keeping their pay low, and finally subduing their moral. It's an unjust economic system in place in which the worker can't escape. The employee must retain his job in order to obtain the reproductive needs including food, clothing, and shelter. (Rockmore, 490) Workers can't quit because they'll gain a bad reputation and won't be rehired. (Thompson p. 54) The employee must ultimately submit to his employer's bidding and endure their horrible abuse. They are victims of the emerging industrial system. Something had to be done to escape unescapable position. With their audience identified, Marxist literature and its ideas spread like wildfire across the world because it related to the desperate working class.   

Why is this important? Well, since each country is different, they'll have their ideas for Marxism. Thus, its historical interpretation will be different. Marx, Lenin, and Stalin understood how Marxism and Communism can occur in a particular country. Marx mentioned in the _Communist Manifesto_, that Marxism is unique to different countries (Marx and Engels, 20). Believe it or not, but Joseph Stalin was quite the national expert. In _Marxism and the National Question_, he meticulously describes the requirements of a nation. Stalin defines nationhood and its requirements as "historically constituted, stable community of people, formed on the basis of a common language, territory, economic life and psychological make-up manifested in a common culture (12-13). All of his mentioned factors will contribute to the interpretation of literature and ideas. The standards of Marxism in one country will be drastically different from another country. Hence, it explains why the Marxist movement was successful in one country and not others. 

That is not to say that the Marxist movement was not at all influential in capitalist societies. It is especially relevant within modern society. Emile Vandervelde describes the Capitalist system as a "Gigantic stock company, a trust, the sum of whose profits are divided among the various stockholders in the form of dividends, interest and profits (Vandervelde, 561)." While revolutions were occurring in Eastern Europe, the sparks of revlution were getting fanned in Britain and the United States. Emile Vandervelde argues in the _Ten Years of Socialism in Europe_, that "English labor and continental socialism do not speak all the same language (Vandervelde 559). If differing countries don't share the same region, language, or culture, they both are witness to the inequalities of their government. Since industrialization had rapidly occurred in England, the country was fist to experience its consequences. Indeed, E.P. Thompson offers a glimpse of work conditions in England. Written in 1963, _Exploitation_,  Thompson identifies the iconic symbol of the Industrial Revolution, the ___factory___. During the early 1800s, the factory created the dreadful working conditions which primed the English for Marxist ideas. This was attributed to the increase of manufacture, rising population in the cities, and technological innovations (Thompson p. 47). The factories were worse than those experienced by plantation slaves in the American South. Whereas slaves work outside and might get a cool breeze, factory workers are locked in hot and unventilated rooms for hours with no rest. (Thompson p. 55) No doubt, this description describes the plight of the working man. Vandervelde again states that "Whether they have read a line of Marx or not, their is not a coal-miner in Yorkshire...who does not join with the social-democrats (Vandervelde, 560)."

Communism and Marxist ideas were also making an appearance in the United States. What set the U.S. apart from other forms of Marxism was its inclusion U.S. politics and inclusion of work unions within its struggle (Watkins, 21). Written in 1920, the _Revolutionary Communism in the United States_ by Gordon Watkins outlines the function and structure of Communist parties in the country. There were two distinct parties within the country: the Socialist and Communist parties. The Socialists promoted economic change through the use of politics. They encouraged their members to participate in voting, be nominated as public officials, or become elected official to expose Capitalist corruption. The Communists decreed that change can only occur through ___violent action___, like the Russian Revolution (Watkins, 20). To do this they needed help from the unions (Watkins, 20). Their strategy was, "...the conquest of power in the industrial unions may become the starting point of the communist reconstruction of society (Watkins, 26) The goal was to form massive groups and strike against their oppressive masters. Only then could they seize "machinery of industry and appropriating it for the workers. Watkins 23-24)" Easier said than done, though. Neither the Socialist nor the Communist parties could agree whether economic and political change should be initiated by political intervention or violent struggle (Watkins, 19).

Despite the fact that these various factions couldn't get their act together, it demonstrates that Marxism was gaining influence in a dominant Capitalist society. In the 1919 primary elections in New York, 54,000 people voted for the Communist Party. (Watkins, 14) American workers saw the disparities between classes and they wanted change. There is no doubt inspired by Russian Marxism and literature throughout Europe (Watkins, 20). Watkins ultimately concludes by stating, "American Communism is gaining a large following among the industrial workers and promises to become an important influence in our political and economic life. (Watkins 33)" This proves that Marxism was making great strides and becoming more relavent in a capitalist country.

Why was Marxism successful in some countries but not others? As mentioned, Marxism could not have occurred without certain conditions to occur. It depended on the country, industrial conditions, and a dominant and subordinate class. Most importantly, it needed violent action to initiate political change. Russia was willing to initiate violent action meet their political goals. Other countries were content with their capitalist. In the _Problem with Historical Interpretation_, B.B. Kendrick mentions, "...philosophers and the economist can teach us something about the interpretation of history, it can't teach us everything. (Kendrick, 27)" History is all about timing and placement! All of these conditions had to be met for the movement to be successful. Marxism was indeed, "revolutionary." for its time. Pun intended.

References:

-Kendrick, B. B. “THE PROBLEM OF HISTORICAL INTERPRETATION.” The North Carolina Historical Review 2, no. 1 (1925): 19–29.
-Korsch, Karl, and Otto Koester. “The Crisis of Marxism.” New German Critique, no. 3 (1974): 7. https://doi.org/10.2307/487734.
-Lenin, Vladimir. What Is to Be Done? [Burning Questions of Our Movement]. Martino Fine Books, 2013.
-Marx, Karl, Frederick Engles. The Communist Manifesto. International Publishers Co., 2014.
-Spargo, John. “The Influence of Karl Marx on Contemporary Socialism.” American Journal of Sociology 16, no. 1 (1910): 21–40.
-Stalin, Joseph. Marxism and the National Question. CreateSpace Independent Publishing Platform, 2013.
-Thompson, E.B., "Exploitation", The Houses of History: A Critical Reader in Twentieth-Century History and Theory. New York: New York University Press, 1999., 1999. 44-58.
-Vandervelde, Emile. “Ten Years of Socialism in Europe.” Foreign Affairs 3, no. 4 (1925): 556. https://doi.org/10.2307/20028399.
-Watkins, Gordon S. “Revolutionary Communism in the United States.” American Political Science Review 14, no. 01 (February 1920): 14–33. https://doi.org/10.2307/1945723.

Recommended Readings:

-Simkhovitch, Vladimir G. “Marxism Versus Socialism. II.” Political Science Quarterly 23, no. 4 (December 1908): 652. https://doi.org/10.2307/2140867.
-———. “Marxism Versus Socialism. III.” Political Science Quarterly 24, no. 2 (June 1909): 236. https://doi.org/10.2307/2140818.
-Vladimir G. Simkhovitch. “Marxism Versus Socialism. I.” The Academy of Political Science, Political Science Quarterly, Vol. 23, no. No. 4 (June 1908): 652–89. https://doi.org/10.2307/2141322.
-Vladimir Zenzinov. “The Bolsheviks and the Peasant.” Council on Foreign Relations, Foreign Relations, 4, no. 1 (October 1925): 134–43. https://doi.org/10.2307/20028428.



