## Women's Historiography in the 21st Century: Expanding the Scope

Historiography regarding Gender and Women’s history has expanded to almost every aspect of the field since its introduction in the 1960s. Women’s history, as we know it today, has its roots in post-modernism and Second Wave Feminism. The concept of “women’s history” was truly a paradigm shift, not in methodology or theory, but instead on whom could and should be included in historical discourse. This shift not only included women as a subject matter, but also as authors of historiography. In the twenty-first century, historians’ research in women and gender history, while built upon the foundations set by the ground-breaking work produced in 1960s-1980s, has expanded to include not only women, but other marginalized groups in various historiographical methodologies.
Highly influential Second Wave feminists such as Gloria Steinem, Catherine MacKinnon, bell hooks, Audre Lorde, Alice Walker, and Betty Friedan questioned what it meant to be a “woman” in the late twentieth century and how women should be able to move throughout the world. Second Wave feminism tackled many issues that faced women in academia such as sexual harassment and Title IX which allowed more women to enter the collegiate level of education. The 1960s and 1970s was also a time in which students, both male and female, demanded more college curriculum that was pertinent to the issues they faced. The contributing factors of increased female students in academia, the rise of Second Wave feminism and female independence, and post-modernism created what was considered the birth of “women’s history”.

Second Wave feminism was not the only change during the late twentieth century to play a crucial role in the movement of inclusion of otherwise marginalized people. Post-modernism, especially the works of Michel Foucault, expanded the range of topics and concepts that historians could analyze and discuss. Foucault’s The History of Sexuality had a huge impact on the historians of the day and can be seen as an influence in many later historian’s work. Post-modernism as well as post-colonialism had a significant impact on the scholarship of women’s history.

Historiography after Second Wave Feminism in the twenty-first century was strongly influenced by another wave of feminism, Third Wave Feminism. According to Third Wave feminists they defined feminism as: “explicitly connecting women’s issues to issues of race, sexuality, class, and ability” (Third Wave Fund). Third Wave feminists felt they had an unfinished work from Second Wave feminism that needed to be addressed, such as sexual harassment and violence against women as well as inclusion of other marginalized people, such as minorities and the LGBTQ community. The inclusion and expansion seen in Third Wave feminism as well as the sentiment of having unfinished work is seen throughout women and gender history in the twenty-first century.

The issues and goals discussed within Third Wave Feminism can be seem throughout scholarship in women and gender history. Martina Kessel defined gendered historiography in 2007 as: “the rewriting and gendering of certain fields of history, women writing history, or the writing of women's lives" at the international conference Gendering Historiography (Linder, Gendering Historiography, p 314). The distinction between of Women and Gender is one of the more notable changes that has developed over the last eighteen years. It is important to remember the distinction between gendered history and gender history. Gender History, while also still related to Women’s history, looks at the relationship between sexuality, identity, masculinity, femininity, etc., in a historical context. While it is common for gender history to be synonymous with women’s history it is crucial to recognize the nuanced difference between the two. Both are rooted in feminist theory and inspired by feminist movements, however, not all Women’s history is feminist, nor does all feminist history have to be solely about women.

One of the main goals of women’s historiography is shining light on the marginalized. Historians who researched gender and women hoped to bring more representation to the field, including previously ignored groups such as people who are transgender, intersex, or otherwise non-binary and their impact society had on them and vice versa. An amazing example of this inclusion is the article by David Rubin, “’An Unnamed Blank That Craved a Name’: A Genealogy of Intersex as Gender”. Rubin uses feminist methodology to trace the role intersex placed in the development of gender in the twentieth-century biomedicine. He cites many influential historians and theorists such as Judith Butler, Michel Foucault, Ann Oakely, and Denise Riley who opened the door to gender and sexuality studies and pushed the boundary even further. As an example of reanalyzing second wave feminism into a new and more expansive theory, Riley states:
“While second-wave feminists theorized the social construction of gender to critique the determinist fallacy that “anatomy is destiny,” feminist and queer scholars have more recently pushed at the limits of gender constructionism, asking whether the very frame of binary gender naturalizes heteronormativity, sexual dimorphism, and the relations of power that underlie those structures.” (Riley, p 21)

Riley further continues his analysis of intersex and its history within biomedicine, femisim, and culture to argue that “intersex is actually central to the history of the analytic categories that have fundamentally shaped the diverse intellectual trajectories, paradigms, pedagogies, and politics of the field” (Riley, p 23).

While race and gender had been discussed in the United States since the 1980s, it was that introduction to the field that led to a new "global perspective". This global awareness of gender and race had a strong connection with post-modernism as well as post-colonialism. Many articles written regarding gender also include some other intersectional aspect to it, whether it be gender analysis, race, sexuality, or class. They also wanted to expand the geographical focus of women outside of the West and into the Middle Eastern, Asian, Latino, and other non-Eurocentric histories. Prime examples of this can be seen in “The 'Masculine' Female: The Rise of Women Doctors in Colonial India, c. 1870–1940” by Ambalika Guha and “Red Lights: The Lives of Sex Workers in Postsocialist China” by Tiantian Zheng. While these are just two examples, women’s history and gender analysis has expanded into economic history, post-colonial history, micro-histories, and almost all forms of historical research.  

While women’s history and gender history has made huge strides over the last eighteen years, there are still many challenges that women in the field of history as well as women’s history faces. One of the challenges of using the lens of women or gender in a historical narrative is that it frequently is categorized as “feminist” theory which is usually synonymous with “radical”. For example, in Beverly Southgate’s book “What is History For?” he follows Bonnie Smith’s criticisms of self-gendering history as male with the disclaimer that while her claim “may sound initially like the paranoid raving of a latter-day feminist”, gendering history was actually a hidden agenda within history (Southgate, p). Not only have women struggled to find recognition in the profession, but women’s history has struggled to find its place in the historical record. Jeremy Popkin explains in his book, From Herodotus to H-Net, “women in history experienced considerable frustration and often outright anger as they pushed to expand their career opportunities and gain recognition with the profession” (Popkin, p 144). Martina Kessle further explains “"Women wrote themselves back into the profession, they often did not succeed in writing themselves back into the canon" (Linder, p 314)

Overall, in the last eighteen years, women’s history and gender history has experienced a growth of subject matter, has expanded its representation of society both Western and non-Western, binary and non-binary, and included many more marginalized groups than had been considered in its creation. The field still continues to expand to other historical theories and methodologies and has strong roots in its feminist background. In time, not only will women be written back into the canon of history, but other marginalized communities of people. Expanding the scope of history of whom should be included in our historical canon should not be filtered or censored, but encouraged and embraced.
