###Historical Sociology
History and sociology are two disciplines that many do not see as being compatible, when in fact; used together they can be very useful. The thought of scholarly disciplines being mixed often makes scholars cringe. My aim in this essay is to explain these two disciplines separately and then collectively. This essay will focus on the mid to late 20th century because this is the time period historical sociology begins being discussed as a discipline. I hope the reader sees the importance of exploring other disciplines, especially when writing history. So much can be taken from other disciplines to add to historical writing. **Historical Sociology is a discipline that focuses on change in societies and allows the scholar to understand the historical reasoning behind societal change.**

It is very important to understand these two disciplines individually to better understand them as a collective. Historical sociology is a sociology that explains and describes social change. History alone is defined as the study o the past. Sociology is defined as the study of patterns of social change. Both disciplines have narratives that **explain and describe**, however, the difference is the **data and methods** used to create the narrative. Narrative plays a role in every discipline; the way the narrative is constructed is what differs from discipline to discipline. History, as a discipline, creates a narrative through gathering facts, arranging them in chronological order and telling why a specific event matters to us today. Sociology, as a discipline, follows the ***scientific method** to test certain variables to understand patterns of social change. 

**Sociology can be seen as the science of social change.** The sociologist starts by making an observation on a certain social phenomena. A question is formed from this observation and a hypothesis is then formed. This hypothesis is a prediction that then allows the sociologist to test the hypothesis, or run an experiment. A conclusion is drawn and added to the narrative. Approaching the world through a scientific lens works for this discipline because in order to make huge claims about the way society works, evidence needs to be present. The only way to get this evidence is to conduct experiments on society itself. Sociologists may collect data quantitatively or qualitatively, although most choose to use quantitative data because the numbers provide more concrete evidence when the sociologist is making their claim. **Quantitative methods aim to explain large changes across time.** 

Different schools of thought exist within sociology and often steer the type of research the sociologist is doing. **Symbolic interactionism** is a school of thought that explains social behavior through the ways in which individuals interact with one another and the social institutions around them (school, work etc.). **Functionalism** is a school of thought that states society has pieces that all play a distinct role. Lastly, the **conflict perspective** views society as being in a continuous conflict war between classes. Karl Marx is the scholar responsible for inventing conflict theory, and therefore is very important to conflict theorists in sociology. 

Marx is an important figure to both sociologists and historians and it is for this reason I am choosing to discuss him in this essay. Karl Marx is writing during the 19th century and focuses heavily on politics and class conflict. He strongly believes in **chaos being the result of this class conflict.** He also believes that **social patterns are what lead to historical change.** The fact that he discusses social issues in relation to historical change shows how these two disciplines can be put together. Marx began the discipline that will eventually become known as historical sociology sometime in the 1950’s. 

The 20th century sees many wars and leaves many individuals asking questions about how we, as a country, had gotten ourselves into such a mess. Many historians are expected to make sense of it all or somehow predict what will happen next. In the 1950’s historians began looking for new methods to explain the societal change around them.   This becomes historical sociology, which both explains and describes a social change (Greene, p.3127). The four characteristics that Skocpol uses to explain this discipline are **1.** asking questions about social phenomenon that go against what we know **2.** longitudinal studies and temporal order matter **3.** actions and structures are what matter and **4.** focus patterns of change (Greene, p.3127).

Historical sociology differs from other historical disciplines in that it **asks questions that go against what we, as a society, think is concrete.** This characteristic is very Marxist in nature. When collecting data, it is important to record things in the exact order they occurred (temporal order) and look at data across different time periods (longitudinal). Being able to explain how society changes over time is important to this discipline as it provides evidence of the claim. This discipline focuses on actions both of individuals and groups. This characteristic is also very Marxist in nature. Lastly, **The main focus of historical sociology is change within society.** The historical sociologist is responsible for mapping patterns of change. 

The nature of historical sociology is focused on understanding how societies have formed throughout history and what patterns they follow. Historical sociologists study topics that center on politics and their power dynamics. By this point I hope it is apparent why Marx is a huge influence to this discipline. His obsession with this unequal distribution of power raises some very important questions that call for more than just a simple historical narrative. These historical questions can only be answered through first understanding what is taking place in society and why. This is why **historical sociologists describe societal patterns in order to aid in their explanation of historical change.** One perfect example of a historical sociology narrative comes from Theda Skocpol and discusses what societal patterns lead to revolutions (historical change). 

Theda Skocpol mentions that **revolutions are socio-historical** in that it takes great societal issues to arouse a revolution (Greene, 3471). Skocpol begins with a hypothesis before she even begins the historical analysis. She does this because, as she is focusing on agrarian bureaucracies, it is important to understand what societal issues are taking place between classes in order to explain why a revolution begins in the fist place…

In conclusion,…


