# Macro to Micro History
1. Clifford Geertz and Hans Medick postulate that as we do not have direct access to the experience of someone else we must "decipher these experiences indirectly through ritual and symbolic acts" (Iggers 104). And thus studying culture and group behavior is the only way to gain insight into personal experience without making assumptions. Vico's work directly addresses this with his ideas about the fact that **humans fundamentally share enough experience for us to derive understanding on an individual level since we are all human beings.** (Popkin 60) How much can we fill in historical blanks just based on empathy and the commonalities of human experience? *Where and how can the two ideas meet in the middle to form a compromise between assumption and known fact?*
2. Jurgen Kocka's fundamental criticism of Geertz and Medick revolves around the lack of an explicit question fueling the research of Medick. (Iggers 105) In this way it could be argued that Kocka's history draws on the element of Marxism in which a fundamental question or theory (in this case the cycles in which different modes of government arise and are overthrown) (Rockmore 490) (Green 35) is the basis for structuring historical research. *This approach is commonly used today by historians and would be argued by Kocka and other proponents as helping to keep historical inquiry focused and in context.* Do you think that having a question in mind when beginning research helps you keep things in context and sift through elements that are not related to the study or is Medick's counter criticism more valid that it sub consciously biases you from the beginning? **Could you consider Kocka's ideas about micro history trivializing history a extension of Marxist historiography in that it is concerned with large movements?**
3. Edward Muir when writing of Foucault's theories on micro history writes "Correctness means conformity to an order of things that has been defined by a discipline or institution" (Iggers 110). This quote relates to Foucault's rejection of specific theories being imparted on history which in turn is a major criticism of enlightenment views that modernization leads to progress socially. **Is it feasible to separate history from an institution or type of methodology when deeming what is correct or incorrect?** Does the fact that we are mortal and inherently limited in our scope mean that historians will always sub consciously assign ideas related to their own experience to those of the past?
4. One of the main strengths of micro history is its ability to "put a human face" on history as opposed to more quantitative analysis and social science based ones. The debate over the importance of relatability over "truth" is one that may never be settled but has been always going on. Heroditus vs Thucydides can be seen as its first known iteration (Popkin 27), both proponents and critics of microhistory have noted the paradoxes it creates within the idea of attempting to be object while also diving into great detail of one particular's subjects existence which in itself is decidedly unobjective. As history contains many paradoxes relating to the struggle between what is the definition of a fact vs fiction how is it possible to reconcile the two which inevitably must happen if history is to be written at all. **Is the job of a historian to bridge the gap between living and past humans in a meaningful way that can be understood through common humanity? Or does recognizing that our own circumstances are radically different mean that trying to assume commonality between humans far removed on a timeline open history up to dangerous assumption and inaccruacies?**

1
10
