# MACRO/MICRO HISTORIES

## G. Iggers, *"From Macro-to Microhistory: The Art of Everyday Life"* and Green and Troup, *"Houses"* "Anthropology and ethnohistorians," (172-180)

### Questions

1. Italian *Microhistorians*, **_Carlo Ginzburg_** and **_Carlo Poni_** found a loss of faith in the social and political fruits of technological progress. (Iggers, P. 102) These men began as Marxist historians, then shifted their framework, turning to an emphasis on the importance of the conditions of everyday life as they are experienced by the common people. In what ways did they reject Marxist historical methods and what did they choose to maintain it? Was this an inevitable shift is methodology, due to the changing natural of a more individualistic society?

2. *Microhistory* and it's new methodological approach, shifts historical focus and no longer see history as a unified process or "grand narrative," in which individuals are submerged, but as a multifaceted flow of many individuals centers. (Iggers, P. 103) How is this approach similar to the approaches adopted during the 20th century social movements, which began to include the previously excluded and marginalized?

3. **_Emile Durkheim_** describes **functionalism** in the context that the study of a social group or community should take precedence over the individual, because human behavior was shaped by moral, religious, and social society in which an individual lives. (Green and Troup, P. 173) **Structuralism,** was more applied to the underlying patterns of thought in human culture. (Green and Troup, P. 174) Does the structural-functionalist method need to be separated and studied independently or in conjunction? Can a historian or anthropologist even use one method or the other independently and hope to gain accurate insight? How did the emphasis within structural-functionalism not fit with conventional historical interest in the causes of political and social change?

4. American Anthropologist **_Clifford Geertz_** pioneered an approach called *'think-description,'* which was a way to interpret symbolic behavior with plurality and a way to understand the conceptual structures in which a subject lived. (Green and Troup, P. 176) According to **_Daniel Varisco_** to understand culture, one must use observation and fieldwork in the everyday thinking and practices, and thus will give us a better insight into that individual. (Green and Troup, P. 176) A general understanding of history, notes that a historian brings a particular bias and scholarly models, concepts, and interpretive frameworks. How much is Geertz' approach to understanding symbolic meaning, an imposition of Western image of the non-Western other? How can his approach be linked to the notion of Western domination of thought and education, as described by **_Edward Said,_** in his *Orientalism?*

5. **_Ethnicity,_** according to Social Anthropologists, is relational based upon perceptions of cultural distinctiveness. (Green and Troup, P. 178) Is *ethnicity,* or the classification of people and group relations, also a form of imposition of Western doctrines of thought? What is the difference between race and ethnicity?
