## From Macro to Micro History 
### *Houses* and Iggers
1. The simultaneous development of social and cultural anthropology in two separate, but similar countries, was one of the precursors to the development of ethnohistory (Green and Troup, pg. 173). Even though America and the UK are both predominantly western cultures, how did two distinctly different subsections of anthropology develop? Do the *distinct* societal values contribute to the differing views on how culture should be studied? 
2. So far, we have learned a lot about the evolution of the study of history, but we have not seen how the differing views on history effected the society of the time. Social Darwinism, while not the predominant view of history, still had considerable negative effects throughout the world. With the development of ethnohistory, came along a different way of looking at culture and societies (Green and Troup, pg. 175). Does ethnohistory have a **positive** effect on the society in which it was developed, like delegitimizing Social Darwinism, or a **negative** effect?  
3. A general trend with in Popkin’s writing is that of larger historical movements, which rarely, if ever, look at the common people. Ancient historiography talked about great men and great events, medieval historiography focused around the church, and even post-Enlightenment historiography discussed larger theories and events. The Enlightenments focus on every man’s agency would be one of the tipping points towards Ethnohistory, or the study of the forgotten individuals (Green and Troup, pg. 178). Does this seem like a historiographical **paradigm shift**, or just a continued evolution? 
4. Because of the “anecdotal antiquarianism” and the focus upon everyday life, Ethnohistory seems to fit within the category of anthropology (Iggers, pg. 113). Ethnohistory lacks some of the basic traits of history, like the separation of different aspects of life, as well as looking at cultures and societies, not individuals. Can Ethnohistory *really* be grouped with history, or should it be classified with anthropology?
5. As most of history has been that of the people in power, Ethnohistory was a complete change. With the secularization during the Enlightenment, and the radical movements of WWII, society was itching to look outside the dominant narrative (Iggers, pg. 101). Was Ethnohistory the product of modernization, or was it the logical evolutionary step? 
