***The Historical Implications of Macro, Micro and Ethnohistory***

1.	The German historian, Jurgen Krucha, was concerned that microhistory or “the study of everyday life, may deteriorate into antidotes and antiquarianism” (Iggers, p. 105). Iggers described Han Medick’s, a microhistory historian, work by saying that **“the microhistory he pursues cannot exist without a macrosocial context”** (Iggers, p. 105). Margo Anderson explained how various quantitative historians were using big data to explain large social movements (Anderson, p. 246). Does microhistory have to include a quantitative history background to provide the proper “context” to avoid falling into the trap of antidotal historical work?

2.	The followers of Microstoria were strongly influenced by Karl Marx and Marxist history (Iggers, P. 108). Marx believed in a historical pre and post capitalist society (Rockmore, p. 492). While we cannot say for certain if Marx’s beliefs about capitalism will come true, however, we can say there is a pre and post Marx historiography movement. How could we study social marcohistory and microhistory trends without being influenced by Marx's ideas?

3.	Instead of adopting Ranke’s view of objectivity in history, microstoria relies on providing a viewpoint that comes from the historian’s perceiving reality (Iggers, p. 110) (Popkin, p. 78). Does microstoria risk falling into the same trap that historians such as Polybus and Cardinal Bossuet fell into by promoting political agenda history (Popkin, p. 32 & p. 57)? **By abandoning the “professionalization” of history movement,** is microstoria truly an academic study of history (Popkin, p 78)?  **Is the development of microstoria a good thing for the historiographic movement?**

4.	Christopher Browning’s book *“Ordinary Men: Reserve Police Battalion 101 and the Final Solution in Poland”* lifted the veil on the role of “little men” in the implementation of the executions and brutality of the Holocaust.  By using new historical methods to present the past through a new perceptive, Browning’s work was similar to Lorenzo Valla’s work that attempted to disprove the Catholic Church’s document that claimed Constantine gave dominion over Rome to the Catholic Church in the 4th century (Popkin, p. 48). **How can microhistory be used break historical misconceptions?**

5.	The reading we have covered have largely featured historians who sought to promote the western world. In the classical era, Livy sought to promote the power of Rome (Popkin, p. 31). In the pre-World War II era throughout Europe, nationalist historians have promoted their own respective countries (Popkin, p. 120). **How does the emergence of ethnohistorians challenge the influence of pro-western historians?** 

6.	The American ethnohistorian Clifford Geertz described “the purpose of ethnography is to understand culture from the perspective of those who experience or live it” (Green, p. 202). However, Geertz was criticized for imposing “a very western image of the non-western other.” **Among ethnohistorians who live in the western world, is there a pro-western bias in their historical work?** If so, how does this impact the study of ethnohistory? Are there some ethnohistorians were a pro-western bias is more prevalent?

7.	The study of ethnohistory can often be defined as the study of ethnic groups (Green, p. 203). McNeill explained that it is the “moral duty” of historians to promote unity and alleviate tensions among opposing groups (McNeill, p. 7). Similarly, to how some individuals would blame nationalist historians for promoting differences that led to conflicts among nations, are ethnohistorians at fault when they create history that outlines the differences among various ethnic groups?

8.	Green states that ethnohistory’s **“findings of historical research have profound material and political implications”** (Green, p. 206). The ethnohistorian James Axtell tried **“to bring the Indian into focus”** in his works to provide an indigenous perspective of white settlers in the early colonial period. Could ethnohistory reshape how history views politics in a similar fashion to how Marxist history impacted social history? (Green, p. 47)

1
