## Questions for Macro-to-Micro History
- If **social science history** was put into question in the 70s and 80s, what does that say about the **lasting effects** of the developments that shifts like **Marxist** history created in the study of history? Was any good that it did- like the **focus on the study of multiple social classes rather than just the ruling class in historical research**- **cancelled out** because the idea that **modernization** would lead to social progress **failed** with the fall of the Soviet Union? _(Iggers, p. 101)_
- Iggers comments that **microhistorians** view large groups of people as **individuals** that should not be "lost in anonomous crowds," but then goes on to reason that **macro** and **micro** histories should be able to **compliment** each other. How would a historian be able to go about writing a history that acknowledges people as individuals with their own valid histories, and still unite them into a **macrohistory** that collectivizes them? Can we unite them into one history effectively, or do the two types of history need to be left alone to continue to just suppliment each other? _(Iggers, p. 103-4)_
- Iggers compares **microhistory** in Italy, through published journals, to the way the **_Annales_** changed and established the study of history in France _(Iggers, p. 108)_. Do the **physical locations** of where the shifts in the study of history were rooted **make a difference in how seriously those shifts take hold**? For example, because **Marx** was a Soviet scholar, do Western historians discount his work more readily? Is microhistory then more important in western historiography because it has physical roots in the West?
- How did **social** and **cultural** anthropology both come to the same conclusion of **cultural relativism** if they both focused on such different origins of culture? Does this suggest the two schools of thought are more similar than they appear? What is the actual _**difference**_ between studying **social patterns** and ideas learned by **individuals** when it comes to analyzing evidence of **human culture**? _(Houses, p. 172-3)_ Also, how do these schools of thought in **anthropology**, which focuses on studying human culture, affect the way **history** is studied compared to how **sociology**, where statistics and economics are used to determines causes and effects, affected it? Is **anthropology** _better equipped_ to influence historical study? Does this make it _more compatible_?
- **Functionalist anthropology** tends to exclude **historical approaches** in its approach to analyzing evidence. With this in mind, how can we understand the idea of **microhistory**? To what extent can we still call something a "history" if it focuses on just one small subject in a limited scope of time? Is there a difference in the validity of microhistories? For example, is it more validly a "history" if we focus on an entire war than focusing on the life of a single general? _(p. 173-4)_ Or does this follow the traditions of finding new sources of historical evidence, like we see each time we discover a new historigraphical shift?
- Does **anthropology's contribution to the study of history** (the increased focus on the study of the private life, rather than the exclusive study of public and political history as a way to explore the social structures of societies) **create better historical narratives**? _(p. 174-5)_ Does it continue the work of **Marx** in creating a more "rounded" view of history by examining how different classes lived during different periods of history? _(Houses, p. 35)_ Or, alternatively, does the **inclusion of information** discovered from sources about **private historical life _hamper_** the writing of a "good" historical narrative?

2
