### HISTORICAL SCALES

1. How did anthropology's interpretation of human culture and progress change between the **1860's and World War I**? What two schools of thought developed over this period as a result and how did they challenge former concepts of human evolution? Think back to the thoughts revolved around **Charles Darwin** and **Emile Durkheim** (Houses pg. 172-173).

2. Can you explain why the **holistic interpretative approach** might be difficult for macrohistory compared to microhistory as **Keith Thomas** argues? Do you agree with this assessment or is this just a historian's failure to **"explore the connections between these two levels of historical experience"** as **Georg Iggers** asserts? (Houses, pg. 174), (Iggers, pg. 104).

3. **George Iggers** notes that **macrohistorical social science approaches** shifted to microhistories due to political and ethical concerns rather than methodological ones. Technological progress had come about at the expense of the **"little people"**. History needed to shift the focus back to everyday life. Do you agree with this? How does Iggers explain the contradictions of this focus in the historical writings of **Fernand Braudel**? (Iggers, pg. 102-103).
4. **Ethnohistory** began making strides to include **"the people without history"** into a historical framework that challenged Eurocentric concepts by combining the fields of anthropology, archeology, linguistics, and re-examining oral traditions allowing for alternative viewpoints. Despite these improvements, how might Ethnohistorians **not be truly** representing the voice of say Native American cultures? Think back to the example of the **"winter that the stars fell".** Would the historical works of a white European or American scholar be different in focus compared to a historian with Native American ancestry? How might a female ethnohistorian's work differ from that of a male ethnohistorian? (Houses, pg. 176-177, 179)
5. Can you explain the approach pioneered by **Clifford Geertz** known as **"thick description"**? Can historians be objective while also reconstructing multiple meanings/interpretations of historical acts and the individuals involved? What was the possible meaning behind the disgusting acts described in **Robert Darnton's** work, *The Great Cat Massacre*? (Houses. pg. 177, 178) (Iggers pg. 104, 116)
