Micro-historians believe *"History must turn to the conditions of everyday life as they are experienced by common people" (Iggers, 102).* **While macro-historians were concerned with the broad "narrative" side to history. Which approach to historical study provides more in-depth analysis of the past? Which one could be applied to the 21st century historical profession, or rather, is the micro- or macro- approach more popular in today's world?**

After reading the Iggers piece which emphasized how micro-historians wanted *"to give history again a human face…" (107).* **Do you think that micro-historians have achieved that goal or is it still a work in progress? What would limit or help them to achieve this goal?**

The Iggers piece is filled with criticism of both the micro- and macro- approaches to historical study. Macro-historians were criticized for their heavy use of quantitative data in their works (108); while micro-historians were criticized for their *"small scale history", "romanticizing past cultures",* among several other things (113). **Is it more persuasive for a historian to include quantitative or qualitative evidence in their writing? Is one more concrete than the other? Or should historians incorporate both evidence types in their works?**

Do you agree with Iggers's claim that *"In the final analysis microhistory appears not as negation of a history of broader social contexts but as a supplement to it" (117)?* **Is microhistory "destined" to remain a supplemental form of historic analysis or it is meant to stand on its own?**

Based on Geertz's criticism of Kieth Thomas on pages 174-175 in Houses, **do you consider it important to study a society's "popular culture" like their relationship or ideas surrounding magic as Thomas attempted to argue? Can forms of "popular culture" like music, movies, photographs, art pieces, and statues provide historians with insights towards the reality of that community's life? Or could these various historical sources depict a different reality than what might have actual been?**

Ranke believed that *"history differed from the natural sciences in that it dealt with singular events and did not aim at discovering general laws" (FHTH, 86).* While the Iggers piece paints a different picture of history, one that had become more dependent on the social sciences while also arguing that the generalizations made by the social sciences approach in history don't stand up to the evidence provided to other historians at the small-scale level of life (Houses, 175). **What pushed history to become so "dependent" upon the social sciences and their generalizations following the time of Ranke? Do you think that those generalizations produced might fit better with the "narrative" approach to history as both look to the past in a broader view than microhistory?** 

2
