Macro/Micro History Questions

- Italian microhistorians **Carlo Ginzburg** and **Giovanni Levi** began their careers as Marxist historians. However, in their transition to microhistory, they still maintained elements of Marx's historical theory (Iggers, p 108). Their belief in social inequality, the role of production the formation of culture, and that historical research must be based on empirical analysis are all hallmark characteristics of Marxism (_Houses_, p 34-36). **Should Ginzburg and Levi still be considered Marxist historians, or is the shift away from large systems to individuals drastic enough to warrant a new historiographical category?** If so, would E.P. Thompson be considered a microhistorian or a Marxist historian (_Houses_ p 44-58; Iggers, p. 103)? Or can they be both?

- Many different groups began to consider **history from the "bottom up"**, focusing on ordinary people and individuals (_Houses_ p 174). A wide range of seemingly different historians, such as Marxist, the third generation of the Annales School, ethnohistorians, as well as those who in general rejected traditional historiography all began to concentrate on the common people (_Houses_, p 33, 92, 174; Iggers, p 107). **What changes inspired historians to consider researching the daily lives of individuals?** Did this new focus rise out of Marxist historiographical theory, or was it the uncertainty of the 1960s, the linguistic shift in history, the rise of sociology and anthropology, or a combination of these changes?

- **Natalie Zemon Davis** states that what she offers in _The Return of Martin Guerre_ is **"in part [her] own invention**, but held tightly in check by the voices of the past" (_Houses_, p 179). This model of history can be traced as far back as Thucydides, however by including her imagination into the narrative, **can her work maintain validity** (Popkin, p 29)? If so, does she confirm historians such as Vico and Croce who argue that the past exists in the mind and understanding of the historian (Popkin, p 60, 101)? If not, does she confirm critics such as Hayden White, that historical works are not transparent enough and can more similar to literary texts (p 136)? Is there any middle ground?

- Both **anthropology and sociology** are concerned with understanding social structures and human behavior (_Houses_, p 111, 174). The study of social anthropology founded in England was profoundly influenced by Émile Durkheim, a key figure in sociology (_Houses_, p 173). **How do social anthropology, and historical sociology differ?** Should we consider them to be separate?

- How useful are ethnohistory and the methods they use, such as **"thick description"**, invented by Clifford Geertz, to the discipline of history (_Houses_, p 177)? Is there a line between symbolic interpretation and fiction? If so, how and where do we draw that line?

1
10
