### Macro-history and Ethnohistory
1. Kocka mentions that micro-hisotry cannot stand wihout a macro-historical context(Iggers,p.105). How true is this? Can individual stories be told without explaining there relation to a larger historical context?
2. It is stated that microstoria explains both the findings and the methods used to get those findings (p.110). How is this different from other disciplines such as sociology and quantitative history? Margo Anderson mentions that quantitative historians must identify their unit of analysis as well as the findings (Anderson, p.250). Likewise, historical sociology highlights patterns of change while also explaining temporal order (Green, p.3127).
3. Iggers states that microhistorians have a certain dislike for the modern world, and suggests that The Annales historians had a similar issue and thus decided to focus on medieval and early modern narratives (p.112). Knowing what we do about the Annales school of thought, how true can we conclude this to be? Is there any evidence that Annales historians disliked the time period they were living in? Either argument can be made as Green mentions that there is no clear cut paradigm to the school (Green, p.87).
4. Do social science approaches ignore qualitative aspects and solely focus on quantitative aspects? If so, what impact does this have on the idea of 'history without a human face'?
5. Edward Sapir argues that the relationship between people and culture is circular (p.4640).That is, people create culture and in turn culture affects individuals. Does this convince you that culture plays the most important role in historical narratives?
6. Through a functionalist approach, all aspects of society are intertwined (p.4653). Does this mean that society should be studied as a whole? If so, what becomes of the 'individual'?
7. Ethnohistory is defined as a mix between history and anthropology, yet is not specifically defined as a discipline, process, or methodology (p.4715). Is it safe to call ethnohistory a methodology given its distinct method of focusing on cultural interactions?  
