## Early Feminist History
After World War II, a phenomenon developed called postmodernism, which would soon sweep through the field of historiography. Postmodernism rejected most of the changes to historiography that had come about with the Enlightenment, a move away from the Rankean traditions of the first half of the 20th century. With this rejection, avenues that had been previously closed now had the ability to make their debut. Along with other histories, including previously colonized people groups, women’s history would emerge alongside second wave feminism. While women’s history would arise because of women questioning why their story had been left out of the narrative, it would grow to become an all-encompassing social movement that would look at the larger social relations between men and women. With this change would come a revolution within historiography. Women were “trapped in a present where oppressive social relations appear natural and inevitable. Knowledge of history is knowledge that things have changed and do change” (Green and Troup, pg. 253). Using the groundwork laid by postmodernism, second-wave feminism would fundamentally transformation historiography through bringing to light the many male-centric ways that the world was classified through, as well as questioning the traditional ways of thinking about the world. 

Feminist historians would seek out a larger change to the institutions that perpetuated an unchanging view of women in history: *historiography*. Throughout much of history, women were pushed to the back burner of the narrative. In an increasingly postmodernist fashion, historians began to question the relationship of women to history. Simone de Beauvoir, one of the most influential feminist during the early postmodern period, wrote The Second Sex, a novel on the treatment of women, and one of the first pieces of literature that addresses the sex and gender distinction. The difference between biological sex and socially constructed gender is what would drive much of second-wave feminism. In Simone de Beauvoir’s groundbreaking essay, *The Second Sex*, she states that “[h]umanity is male, and man defines woman, not in herself, but in relation to himself” (De Beauvoir, pg. 26). Beauvoir was bringing the actual problem to the forefront. Instead of attacking the lack of female perspectives within society, she was questioning the fact that a woman’s *entire* existence was based upon the men who surrounded her. This was groundbreaking, as it was questioning the system itself, and the positionality of history as a whole. 

Similarly, within historiography, women’s historians began to question the fact that all histories written about women were written by men. The male historians bias and lack of knowledge surrounding women were bound to come through, which would perpetuate the dominant societies view of women. While historiography had continued to grow and change, the fundamental thing that stayed the same was the way that the male dominant society would perpetuate their own view of women. Without questioning their positionality, historians wrote about the role of women in society as a fixed entity, never seeing their view of women as anything other than the truth. Up until second-wave feminism, the categorization of history was generally made up of areas traditionally controlled by males. The lack of histories written by females made it incredibly difficult to change the status of women throughout history, as it was only being looked at through a male lens. Because of the revolutionary work done by De Beauvoir, and many other early second-wave feminists like her, the underlying institutions were being questioned, and actual change was beginning to occur within the field of historiography. This was one of the ways that second-wave feminists would go about changing the traditional view of women, within historiography, and within society as a whole. 

When looking at the periodization of history, and as such, the changes in historiography over time, most periodization conformed to the male dominated view of history. Looking at history through this lens is what continually reinforced the traditional view of women. Feminist historians destroyed the notion that there was a natural place for women within the world. This was not a view that historians actively tried to perpetuate, rather a concept that previous historians had conformed to, and now was very difficult to get away from. Historians themselves “could not lay claim to special knowledge about the ‘natural” roles and relation of the sexes, but they knew what that order was, or ought to be. History simply tended to confirm it,” (Kelly, pg. 7). This was one of the fundamental ways that the female historians would go on to change historiography. Recognizing that most categories within history were created for and by men, women could then go forward and illustrate that the gender roles that had seemed so “natural” to histories were actually “a social and not a natural one. This perception forms the core idea that upsets traditional thinking,” (Kelly, pg. 1). When the traditional periodization of history was questioned, it left the doors open for other marginalized groups to have their time in the spotlight. Joan Kelly’s famous text, *Did Women Have a Renaissance*, would be one of the first examples of women questioning the status quo, and expressing their discontent with it. This would be one of the major turning points for historiography as a whole. 

The relationships between the sexes, as well as the relationships between the majority and the minority, would be forever changed because of feminist historian’s push into postmodernism. Postmodern historiography would begin to question the traditional categories of analysis that had been created by the historiographic revolution during the Enlightenment. Questioning the positionality of those who created the categories, as well as the periodization of history, would leave the pathway open for other people groups to be included in the narrative. Joan Kelly was a prominent female historian, who would go on to change the field of historiography through revolutionizing the periodization of history. One of Kelly’s seminal theories was that surrounding a female renaissance. Kelly stated that the major moments in history for men were not necessarily the same for women, sometimes “events that further the historical development of men, liberating them from natural, social, or ideological constraints, have quite different, even opposite, effects upon women,” (Kelly, pg. 19). This is one of the flaws with a male centered history, and something that feminist historians tried to change within historiography. Through their striving they were able to push the narrative off center and open the floodgates for other marginalized groups in society. 

Over the course of the 20th century, feminist historians continually pressed for a paradigm shift within the field of historiography. Postmodernism, during which the term paradigm shift was invented, was a drastic change from the modernist historians of the past. When second-wave feminism began to infiltrate higher learning institutions, they were able to create the lasting change that they had desired from the start. While this was a huge step, Beauvoir pointed out that, “woman has always been, if not man’s slave, at least his vassal; the two sexes have never divided the world up equally; and still today, even though her condition is changing, woman is heavily handicapped” (Beauvoir, pg. 29). This was true not only in the everyday world, but also within academia. Female historians, while becoming more and more common in the profession, would not be able to feel the full effect of the slow changes within society until many years later. This was also an incredibly hard task, because “in seeking to add women to the fund of historical knowledge, women’s history has revitalized theory, for it has shaken the conceptual foundations of historical study.” (Kelly, pg. 1). Frankly, it was an uphill battle, fighting against ingrained societal norms, which became even more difficult because “of the social consequences of sex category membership: the allocation of power and resources not only in the domestic, economic, and political domains but also in the broad arena of interpersonal relations,” (West and Fenstermaker, pg. 390). Women infiltrating into the world of academia was a huge step towards the paradigm shift within society that second-wave feminists were fighting for, and they were able to use the institutional power that they had gained to help mold the change they were seeking in other areas. 

Much of society was working against the early second-wave feminists, and change was not instantaneous. Questioning the traditional ways of thinking was met with some resistance, and it was even more difficult because many of the historical artifacts looked at were enforcing the same agenda about women. This also was increasingly difficult because there is not as much historical evidence surrounding women as there is needed to create a full historical text about women in any age. Throughout history, women would experience different relations to power, but they would never be equals to men. While during the middle ages, women had some agency within the feudal system, there was “no counterpart in [the] Renaissance” (Kelly, pg. 31). As the ability to hold power slipped away after the middle ages, so did the small grasp that women had had within historiography. Not until much later, after postmodernists had ravaged much of history before it, would feminist historians have the space to say their piece. Early second-wave feminists would lead the way to break the norms within historiography, giving way to a more decentralized narrative, and the ever present question of one’s positionality and inherent bias. These changes have taken time to come about and “[t]he extraordinary range and variety of early modern women’s cultural agency and creativity have come into focus in ways that Kelly could hardly have imagined,” (Coletti, pg. 249). Coletti, reviewing Kelly’s work almost fifty years later, is one of the examples of the sweeping change that would take hold of historiography. Coletti’s critique of second-wave feminists was only possible because of the work done by early feminists like Kelly. The effects of second-wave feminism within history would take decades to solidify and only then would it create the change they wanted to see. 

Feminist historians would contribute a *significant* amount to the push towards postmodernism. By exposing the problematic ways in which historiography had been previously practiced, as well as fundamentally shifting away from the singular perspective of the white male, historiography was pushed into a new era. These changes were monumental, and pushed for other groups to finally be included in the grand narrative, but second-wave feminism had its problems. While this was the first step towards a more all-inclusive history, there was almost no mention of women of color. White, middle-class, women led the charge, but they seemed to only take their issues into account. In the later 1980’s, this would profoundly change with the development of third-wave feminism. Women of color, of different socio-economic backgrounds, and of differing identities would begin to push for another change in historiography, creating an entirely new tidal wave of change. 

During the early development of postmodernism, second-wave feminism would take hold of society. Not only would second-wave feminism change the way that society viewed women of the present, but also how the viewed female agency of the past. Second-wave feminism would fundamentally transform historiography by forcing historians to break free from traditional ways of thinking. Along with this, it would also bring to light the singular male lens that society had been viewed through. Both of these changes would lead to historians to continually question their positionality, as well as historiography opening its doors to new and different perspectives, both of which were a much needed breathe of fresh air in the realm of historiography.

### Bibliography

Beauvoir, Simone de, et al. *The Second Sex*. New York : Alfred A. Knopf, 2010., 2010. cat05987a, Zimmerman Second Floor HQ1208 .

Coletti, Theresa. “‘Did Women Have a Renaissance?’ A Medievalist Reads Joan Kelly and Aemilia Lanyer.” Early Modern Women: An Interdisciplinary Journal, vol. 8, 2013, pp. 249–59.

Fenstermaker, Sarah. “Dividing the Domestic: Men, Women, and Household Work in Cross-National Perspective.” Contemporary Sociology, vol. 40, no. 2, 2011, pp. 233–35. WorldCat.org.

Green, Anna, and Kathleen Troup. *The Houses of History : A Critical Reader in Twentieth-Century History and Theory*. New York : New York University Press, 1999., 1999. Zimmerman Second Floor D13.2 H64 1999.

Kelly, Joan. *Women, History & Theory : The Essays of Joan Kelly*. University of Chicago Press, 1984. WorldCat.org.

Scott, Joan W. “Gender: A Useful Category of Historical Analysis.” American Historical Review, vol. 91, no. 5, 1986, pp. 1053-75.

Southgate, Beverley C. Postmodernism in History : Fear or Freedom? Routledge, 2003, WorldCat.org.

Thompson, Willie. *Postmodernism and History*. Palgrave Macmillan, 2004. WorldCat.org.

West, Candace, and Sarah Fenstermaker. *Doing Gender, Doing Difference : Inequality, Power, and Institutional Change*. Routledge, 2002. 

