## Postcolonialism
#### Jenni Scanlan

Postcolonialist history is part of the larger umbrella of poststructuralist historiography. Postcolonialism is a school of thought that deals with the effects of colonization on societies and peoples. The term “postcolonialism” is often a bit of a misnomer— “post” typically means “after,” as in the studying is happening after colonization, with colonization being over (McClintock, 259). Most of the societies examined through the lens of postcolonialism are still dealing with many of the problems of colonization and Eurocentric views, like the struggles for independence, return of resources, and recovery of history (Houses 278). However, the Eurocentric view of history— the one in which Europe still remains posed as the center for culture and society— views colonialism as firmly in the past, and as a part of capitalist development in the West, where the colonies were used as resources for raw materials to fuel production. Rather than focus on how colonialism affected the societies that were colonized, it upholds colonialism as part of the “European grand narrative of modernization,” or, a period of history in which the key defining feature was the advancement of modernization in the West rather than a period in which many peoples were conquered and subjugated (Chatterjee, xi).

Postcolonial history then focuses on dealing with the effects of colonization on the histories of the colonized peoples. During colonization, histories were written by the elite, who in colonized societies, were also the European conquerors. Their world-view, which placed Europe as the center of culture and civilization, led them to write histories of societies that they colonized in a manner that placed them relative to their own society. Beyond that, however, the colonists placed the peoples they colonized both diametrically opposite, and lesser than. Their classifications of colonized peoples was limited to a binary that placed them as the opposite of European culture, which they viewed as an advanced society and the pinnacle of culture. By viewing them as the opposite, that necessarily meant that the colonized people were classified as lesser, and justified their beliefs that they should be subordinate.

The writing of postcolonialist histories has been an effort to counteract the lasting effects of the colonial histories, which tend to ignore or gloss over the severe damage colonialism had on colonized societies. This includes the loss of land and resources, which in many cases holds significant spiritual value to these peoples as well as the means to exist independently. Cultural traditions and general knowledge of their pre-colonial past has also been wiped out in many places, due to persecution and forced conversions— one such example being the Spanish conquest of what is now modern day the American Southwest. The Conquistadores captured and forcibly converted the Indigenous Peoples to Christianity, at least where their diseases and conquest didn’t just outright kill them. And in many cases, the sheer number of lives taken during colonization is utterly ignored in the writing of history. In Houses of History, Anna Green and Kathleen Troup speak about the motivations of postcolonial writing, in trying to correct these issues: "Postcolonial historical writing in the past twenty years has developed [the] two critiques of imperialism and colonialism by deconstructing colonialist discourses, and reconstructing the appalling scale of loss experienced by colonized and indigenous peoples" (Houses, 281). Postcolonial historical writing is an attempt to move away from imperialist and colonial views of societies, and return to more Enlightenment ideals in an effort to portray the impact of colonialism on colonized societies with a greater, more honest attempt to achieve accuracy. According to Arif Durlik, the author of “The Postcolonial Aura,” one of the goals of postcolonial writing, in an effort to shake the former colonial biases, is to reestablish colonized societies as complex, rather than the simplistic way they were (and still are) presented in colonial histories (329). To accomplish this, there are two different schools of thought in writing postcolonial history— essentialism and subaltern.

One belief attached to the writing of postcolonial history is that the only real way to combat colonial ideas is to return to pre-colonization ideals and culture. This is called essentialism (Houses, 282). In essentialism, historians strive to analyze and present history as it was before colonization. They tend to emphasize this, and work to present a reconstruction of culture before colonization. This is especially important in the discovery of land rights in many places: “Historians in [colonized] countries play a key role in reconstructing the historical process of land alienation” (Houses 278-9). Presenting a narrative that clearly outlines pre-colonization ownership of land and resources is a valuable tool for these peoples, because it can help them in political and legal battles with colonizing forces over land ownership claims. By having a record of what was taken from them, they can use it in their efforts to “decolonize” ancestral lands and resources in their fights for independence and separation from colonization—what is, more often than not, the goal of decolonization. We see this frequently in the Southwest United States, where the Indigenous Peoples struggle with the United States government and private corporations for possession of sovereign, protected, and ancestral lands.

The other belief that can drive postcolonial historical writing is a subaltern approach. The subaltern approach reexamines colonialism through modern scientific methods, like research and study. Where history was written from the perspective of a small elite class in colonialism, the subaltern approach aims to rewrite it now from other, multiple perspectives (Houses, 283). In this method, representation is focused on as a problem that needs to be addressed. By writing from a series of perspectives, rather than the limited, Eurocentric one, history can be presented in a more universal light— history becomes more inclusive of all peoples involved, and attempts to not pick one version of events, but rather, attempts to find a deeper truth within the often conflicting accounts. One of the ways it can do this is by critically engaging with problematic ideology, like nationalism, which participates in the suppression of some facts and voices over others (Houses, 284). These ideologies, like nationalism in particular, tend to rely on biased narratives and the “othering” of external groups, like these colonized peoples. They present a narrative that upholds those in power as a group whose actions are justified, usually through the guise of “progress” or “modernization.” Anyone outside of this group, fighting against their actions becomes a villainized group because they are then fighting against this advancement being accomplished by the protagonists of that type of narrative.

These two ideas on how to write a postcolonial history determine the purpose of the history that is written, at least, in some ways. Essentialist post-colonial history focuses more on pre-colonization history more than anything else. This focus then makes that history’s purpose to return the colonized society to pre-colonized ways. In the earlier example it becomes a tool which peoples use to fight for the restoration of former land possession, but the same establishment of past history can be a motivator for a revitalization of any cultural difference that changed during colonization, like the use of a language or a method of historical fashion. In histories written with the subaltern method, the focus is on the ignored voices of colonial history, which then leads to a purpose of directly addressing the problems of the previous, colonial style of history writing. The use of modern methods to attempt to reach a more accurate version of history lends this type of postcolonial writing to teaching and education. It fills a corrective role in society, where the narrative it produces reveals important details that were not reported in colonial history and corrects the Eurocentric bias of colonialism being an overwhelmingly positive event. There purposes of postcolonial histories come from how they were written then, but the other important question that determines the reception of these histories is who can write them. Addressing the issue of who can write postcolonial histories can, in some cases, determine how trustworthy and believable these histories are.

The academic world is generally split on the issue of whether it is possible, let alone acceptable, for a historian from outside of the colonized society to write a postcolonial history about said colonized society. For example, some colonized societies find this idea inappropriate. Some cultures in the Western world, in areas like North America and the Pacific, subscribe to “possessive exclusivism,” or the idea that only the colonized should write postcolonial history (Houses, 282). This idea tends to go hand in hand with the essentialist idea of writing history. If the goal of the history is to provide a narrative that restores pre-colonial power in some way to colonized peoples, the concern over whether or not an outsider is writing the narrative is key. If the narrative comes from within the society, it is an act of empowerment. If it is written by an outsider, it can come across as yet another external group trying to control what the colonized society does.

Other areas of the academic community see no problem with historians with outsider perspectives writing postcolonial histories. In “Questions of Multi-culturalism,” Gayatri Chakravorty Spivak agrees that this isn’t necessarily an issue (62-3). This opinion, however, tends to align itself more with the perspective that postcolonial history should be written with subaltern methods. Because the subaltern type of postcolonial is not necessarily geared towards returning colonized peoples to their pre-colonial pasts, it is less important what the historian’s personal background is. What is more important is how they deal with their personal biases. While it is impossible to ever write a completely un-biased history, as long as the historian writing the postcolonial history is aware of their own bias and allows it to interfere in their narrative as little as possible, the end goal of producing a narrative that fairly acknowledges underrepresented peoples is still achievable. For this type of postcolonial narrative, the question of who writes it is not nearly as important as if it is written fairly or not.

Regardless of the chosen methods or intent of writing a postcolonial narrative, postcolonial history all aims to do one thing— rewrite colonial history to give a voice to the groups that were underserved and unacknowledged in colonial history. This goal has its challenges— the biggest one being that sometimes, it is impossible to create a true postcolonial narrative at all. This challenge comes from the tradition of creating historical narratives from traditionally Western evidence— firsthand accounts, provable facts, written sources. Writing postcolonial history can then become challenging because the types of sources that historians rely on are often heavily biased towards a Eurocentric ideal, or they simply do not exist in a way that would be easily converted into a modern narrative (Houses, 284-5). For example, oral history constantly changes, purely by the nature of its distribution— telling and retelling by word of mouth. It is extremely difficult, if possible at all, to find concrete evidence within the changing stories that can be scientifically tried and tested. In other cases, history has been deliberately erased by the colonizers. In cases of conversion, traditions and stories are deliberately replaced by new traditions and the culture of the colonizers, like the modification of holidays to better suit the new religion. Because of this, writing true postcolonial histories is sometimes impossible, because concrete evidence is sparse, or has been modified so heavily it is no longer trustworthy.
