### Marxism and its Historical Significance
Jerome T. Mondragon

With the Age of Enlightenment had just appeared in Europe, the Western world was now entering a new age of science, art, and history. It was a time when history was exclusively focused on the accomplishments of religious and royal authority figures (Popkins, 57). It was also during this time when industrialization and international dependency began to emerge. Old methods of industry were being replaced with the mass production of goods, a growing economy, and the creation of a new capitalist market. The unfortunate consequence with the rise of industry was the division of classes. As these differences became apparent, the interpretation of history drastically changed. Thus, Marxist movement emerged in the 1800s as a means to represent the disadvantaged class (Marx and Engles, 20).  Historians now focused on the social and economic disparities that existed. 

To understand the movement, it's important to understand its creator. The most important figure of the movement is of course Karl Marx. The entire movement is named after him. Without him, there wouldn't be a movement! He and his contemporary, Frederick Engles, formulated the commanding literature on the subject, _Communist Manifesto_, Devised in the Fall of 1848, the pamphlet was a theoretical and practical program for the emerging Communist Party. Its purpose was to reflect,"...the history of the modern working class." The ultimate goal of the working class was to shift the balance of power in their favor by gaining control of the economic and political systems (Marx and Engles, 30). Thus, the _Manifesto_ was an important historical outline to initiate social and economic change. 

Social differences were nothing new in history. Marx and Engles admitted there has always been a class that has been subservient to another since the Roman Empire (Marx and Engles, 9). Enlightenment authors such as Machiavelli focused on the Italian power struggles while presenting the perspective of the common people (Machiavelli, 4). What is new in the Marxist era was its emphasis on the ___Industrial Revolution as the iconic factor for the social and economic inequalities___. E.P. Thompson mentions in _Exploitation_, "The physical instruments of production were seen as giving rise in a direct and more-or-less compulsive way to new social relationships, institutions, and cultural modes." (Thompson p. 46) Marx also mentions, "Modern industry has converted the little workshop of the patriarchal master into the great factory of the industrial capitalists (Marx and Engles, 16).” Two classes emerged from this system:  the controlling _bourgeoisie_, and the subordinate _proletarians_ (Marx and Engles, 10-11)." 

With two distinct classes identified, ___ Marxist historians specifically focuses on the viewpoint of the worker___ British historian E.P. Thompson describes the plight of the worker by explaining the uneasy relationship between the employee and employer. Initially, the employers are the rulers of their enterprise because they profit from workers' labor, keeping their pay low, and finally subduing their moral. It's an unjust economic system in place in which the worker can't escape. The employee must retain his job in order to obtain the reproductive needs including food, clothing, and shelter. (Rockmore, 490) Workers can't quit because they'll gain a bad reputation and won't be rehired. The employee must ultimately submit to his employer's bidding and endure their horrible abuse (Thompson p. 54). They are victims of the emerging yet perpetual industrial system. Indeed, Thompson also identifies ___the factory as the iconic symbol of oppression___.  He provides a glimpse of working conditions in 19th Century England. The factory created the dreadful working conditions which were attributed to the increase of manufacture, rising population in the cities, and technological innovations (Thompson p. 47). The factories were worse than those experienced by plantation slaves in the American South. Whereas slaves work outside and might get a cool breeze, factory workers are locked in hot and unventilated rooms for hours with no rest. (Thompson p. 55) 

Marxism was no doubt influenced by the Enlightenment movement. Events such as the 1789 French Revolution demonstrated that ordinary people were active participants of history and they were control of their own destiny (Popkin, 71). The printing press created by Johannes Guttenberg increased the quantity and distribution of written texts to the public (Popkin, 53-54). Marxist literature and its ideas spread like wildfire across the world because it related to the desperate working class (Lenin, 20-21).  However, the ruling class had exclusive control of what is to be read. Literature was heavily monitored and edited the ruling class. It took brilliant Marxist authors, such as Vladimir Lenin, to find creative methods, which included disguising their true meaning of messages, to escape government censors (Lenin, 20-21). 

Vladimir Lenin was an important Marxist figure because he wasn’t merely just a Marxist historian, but also an active participant in history. What makes Lenin unique to historiographical literature is passion and dedication to the cause. B.B. Kendrick admits that, "___...no proposition is more susceptible of historical truth than that there is a tendency for various economic groups to become aware of their class interests and to work consciously for the fulfillment of ends which they consider good____ (Marx and Engles, 27)." This must be done by a charismatic leader or individual. In _What is to be Done?_ written Lenin, he mentions that the, "role of vanguard can be fulfilled only by a party that is guided by an advanced theory (Lenin, 28). Written in 1901, it is an outline for Marxist policies in the Russia at that time. The tone of this work presented in an authoritative yet condescending manner. This was necessary awaken the workers, trade unions, and peasants into class consciousness. (Lenin, 31-35) Thus, Lenin was the individual to lead Russia in a bloody revolt against the aristocrats. Through his intelligence, charming character, and his captivating writings, Lenin was able "emancipation of the workers" and abolition of old systems as the Manifesto had decreed. (Marx and Engles 6, 20).

Western 20th century historians like Gordon Watkins, Emile Vandervelde, and E.P. Thompson, offer their own perspective and interpretation on Marxism from their own unique countries. As noted in the Enlightenment era, nationalism was on the rise in the 18th Century as countries attempted to preserve their own cultures and unique identities (Popkin70). Believe it or not, but Joseph Stalin was quite the national expert. In _Marxism and the National Question_, he meticulously describes the requirements of nationhood as, "historically constituted, stable community of people, formed on the basis of a common language, territory, economic life and psychological make-up manifested in a common culture (Stalin, 12-13). Marx understood how Marxism and Communism will differ in separate countries (Marx and Engels, 20). These additional factors explain how Marxism was accepted and inevitably successful in some countries, and not successful in others. Russian Marxism literature eventually reached and inspired workers throughout Europe and the United States (Watkins, 20).  As the 54,000 people voting for the Communist Party during the 1919 New York primary elections can attest, Americans were aware of class disparities (Watkins, 14).  Emile Vandervelde argues in the _Ten Years of Socialism in Europe_, that "Whether they have read a line of Marx or not, there is not a coal-miner in Yorkshire...who does not join with the social-democrats (Vandervelde, 560)."

Whereas Marxism might have been successful in Europe, it was not the United States. Western historians are different from Eastern European authors, because they drastically ___criticize its usefulness in a capitalist society___. Written in 1920, the _Revolutionary Communism in the United States_ is a deep criticism of Marxist politics in the U.S. The author Gordon Watkins outlines the function, structure, and demise of country’s Communist parties. There were two distinct parties within the country: the Socialist and Communist parties. The Socialists promoted economic change through the use of politics. They encouraged their members to participate in voting, be nominated as public officials, or become elected official to expose Capitalist corruption. The Communists decreed that change can only occur through violent action, like the Russian Revolution (Watkins, 20). To do this, they needed help from the unions (Watkins, 20). Their strategy was, "...the conquest of power in the industrial unions may become the starting point of the communist reconstruction of society (Watkins, 26) Easier said than done. Neither the Socialist nor the Communist parties could agree whether economic and political change should be initiated by political intervention or violent struggle (Watkins, 19). Watkins sums up the American problem by stating, “[the] American workman are too prosperous to become susceptible to revolutionary political and industrial philosophy (Watkins, 14).” 

Marxism was certainly dramatic movement for its time, it could not have occurred without certain conditions to transpire. What set Marxism writing from other historical time periods was its emphasis on social and economic conditions caused by industrial conditions. The movement was a great influence towards post colonialism in the struggle against colonialism and imperial empires (Green and Troup, 277-278). In the _Problem with Historical Interpretation_, B.B. Kendrick mentions, "...philosophers and the economist can teach us something about the interpretation of history, it can't teach us everything. (Kendrick, 27)." History is all about timing and placement! All of these conditions had to be met for the movement to be successful. Marxism was indeed, "revolutionary." for its time. Pun intended.


References
-Green, Anna, and Kathleen Troup. The Houses of History : A Critical Reader in Twentieth-	Century History and Theory. New York : New York University Press, 1999., 1999. 277-278.

-Kendrick, B. B. “THE PROBLEM OF HISTORICAL INTERPRETATION.” The North Carolina Historical Review 2, no. 1 (1925): 19–29.

-Korsch, Karl, and Otto Koester. “The Crisis of Marxism.” New German Critique, no. 3 (1974): 7. https://doi.org/10.2307/487734.

-Lenin, Vladimir. What Is to Be Done? [Burning Questions of Our Movement]. Martino Fine Books, 2013.

-Marx, Karl, Frederick Engles. The Communist Manifesto. International Publishers Co., 2014.

-Popkin, Jeremy D. From Herodotus to H-Net : The Story of Historiography. New York ; 	Oxford : Oxford University Press, [2016], 2016.

-Spargo, John. “The Influence of Karl Marx on Contemporary Socialism.” American Journal of Sociology 16, no. 1 (1910): 21–40.

-Stalin, Joseph. Marxism and the National Question. CreateSpace Independent Publishing Platform, 2013.

-Thompson, E.B., "Exploitation", The Houses of History: A Critical Reader in Twentieth-Century History and Theory. New York: New York University Press, 1999., 1999. 44-58.

-Vandervelde, Emile. “Ten Years of Socialism in Europe.” Foreign Affairs 3, no. 4 (1925): 556. https://doi.org/10.2307/20028399.

-Watkins, Gordon S. “Revolutionary Communism in the United States.” American Political Science Review 14, no. 01 (February 1920): 14–33. https://doi.org/10.2307/1945723.

Recommended Readings
-Simkhovitch, Vladimir G. “Marxism Versus Socialism. II.” Political Science Quarterly 23, no. 4 (December 1908): 652. https://doi.org/10.2307/2140867.

-———. “Marxism Versus Socialism. III.” Political Science Quarterly 24, no. 2 (June 1909): 236. https://doi.org/10.2307/2140818.

-Vladimir G. Simkhovitch. “Marxism Versus Socialism. I.” The Academy of Political Science, Political Science Quarterly, Vol. 23, no. No. 4 (June 1908): 652–89. https://doi.org/10.2307/2141322.

-Vladimir Zenzinov. “The Bolsheviks and the Peasant.” Council on Foreign Relations, Foreign Relations, 4, no. 1 (October 1925): 134–43. https://doi.org/10.2307/20028428.



